Toward Multimodal Modeling of Emotional Expressiveness
Victoria Lin∗
Carnegie Mellon University
vlin2@andrew.cmu.edu
Michael A. Sayette
University of Pittsburgh
sayette@pitt.edu
Jeffrey M. Girard∗
Carnegie Mellon University
jmgirard@cmu.edu
Louis-Philippe Morency
Carnegie Mellon University
morency@cs.cmu.edu
0
2
0
2
g
u
A
1
3
]
C
H
.
s
c
[
1
v
1
0
0
0
0
.
9
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a
ABSTRACT
Emotional expressiveness captures the extent to which a person
tends to outwardly display their emotions through behavior. Due
to the close relationship between emotional expressiveness and
behavioral health, as well as the crucial role that it plays in social
interaction, the ability to automatically predict emotional expres-
siveness stands to spur advances in science, medicine, and industry.
In this paper, we explore three related research questions. First,
how well can emotional expressiveness be predicted from visual,
linguistic, and multimodal behavioral signals? Second, how impor-
tant is each behavioral modality to the prediction of emotional
expressiveness? Third, which behavioral signals are reliably re-
lated to emotional expressiveness? To answer these questions, we
add highly reliable transcripts and human ratings of perceived
emotional expressiveness to an existing video database and use
this data to train, validate, and test predictive models. Our best
model shows promising predictive performance on this dataset
(RM S E = 0.65, R 2 = 0.45, r = 0.74). Multimodal models tend to
perform best overall, and models trained on the linguistic modality
tend to outperform models trained on the visual modality. Finally,
examination of our interpretable models’ coefficients reveals a num-
ber of visual and linguistic behavioral signals—such as facial action
unit intensity, overall word count, and use of words related to social
processes—that reliably predict emotional expressiveness.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Applied computing → Psychology.
KEYWORDS
affective computing, behavior understanding, emotion expression
ACM Reference Format:
Victoria Lin, Jeffrey M. Girard, Michael A. Sayette, and Louis-Philippe
Morency. 2020. Toward Multimodal Modeling of Emotional Expressive-
ness. In ICMI ’20: ACM International Conference on Multimodal Interaction,
∗ Both authors contributed equally to this research.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and /or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ICMI ’20, October 25–29, 2020, Utrecht, the Netherlands
© 2020 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-XXXX-X/18/06. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/1122445.1122456
October 25–29, 2020, Utrecht, the Netherlands . ACM, New York, NY, USA,
10 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/1122445.1122456
1 INTRODUCTION
Emotional expressiveness is a psychological attribute that captures
the degree to which a person tends to display their emotions through
behavior [25, 36]. A highly expressive person tends to exhibit what
they feel through their facial movements, vocalizations, and other
gestures, whereas a less expressive person tends to hide or hold their
feelings in. Emotional expressiveness is related to but distinct from
other affect-related traits. It is much narrower in its scope (i.e., more
specific in terms of the patterns of behavior it explains) than broad
personality traits such as extraversion and neuroticism [40], and
it differs from emotionality [58] in that it describes the frequency
and intensity of emotional displays rather than the frequency and
intensity of emotional experiences.
Greater scientific understanding of emotional expressiveness is
critical for many areas of basic and applied research. For exam-
ple, correctly inferring a person’s mental state from their behavior
(e.g., how much they are enjoying a comedy) likely requires careful
consideration of how expressive that person is generally: a small
chuckle from a highly expressive person may mean that they are
unimpressed, whereas that same chuckle from a normally tight-
lipped person may mean the opposite. Similarly, when synthesizing
expressive behavior for a robot or virtual agent, it is important to
consider how much emotion it should display over the course of
an interaction. For example, there may be some settings where a
more expressive robot or agent would increase user engagement
and enjoyment [28] and others where such displays would be inap-
propriate or distracting. Users may also prefer a robot or agent that
matches his or her level of expressiveness, which would require the
ability to detect user expressiveness and then modulate the synthe-
sis of behavior accordingly. Finally, emotional expressiveness plays
an important role in healthcare, where persistent abnormalities in
the display of emotion (e.g., reduced or inappropriate emotional
expressiveness) serve as observable signs of various medical con-
ditions (e.g., depression, mania, schizophrenia, and brain injury)
[1]. The ability to automatically detect such abnormalities could
enhance the objectivity and efficiency of clinical assessment.
Furthermore, in many of these applications, interpretability is
paramount. Understanding which behavioral signals are reliably
related to emotional expressiveness would enable virtual agents
and robots to more effectively simulate expressive behavior and
would aid in the training of clinicians. Understanding which behav-
ioral signals a model is using to predict emotional expressiveness
would help to validate these models and would allow clinicians to
ICMI ’20, October 25–29, 2020, Utrecht, the Netherlands
Lin, Girard, Sayette, and Morency
discount their predictions when appropriate (e.g., when an impor-
tant behavioral signal observed in a given patient is known to be
caused by something other than disease, such as a drug side-effect).
In an ideal world, emotional expressiveness would be objectively
measured as the true frequency and intensity of emotional displays.
However, the affective sciences currently lack a single, agreed-upon
way of delineating and representing emotional displays [4, 10], so
this objective ground truth is currently out of reach. Instead, we
focus on third-party observers’ perceptual ratings of emotional
expressiveness. This approach has the potential to introduce sub-
jectivity and bias, but we can quantify this subjectivity through
inter-rater reliability analyses and mitigate it through the aggrega-
tion of ratings [38, 51]. Operationalizing emotional expressiveness
through observer ratings also has the benefit of paralleling the stan-
dard approach used in medicine, where clinicians observe patients’
behavior and rate their emotional expressiveness [1].
Motivated by the potential applications described previously, the
current study explores the following research questions:
(1) How well can we predict emotional expressiveness from
multimodal representations of participants’ behavior?
(2) How much do the different behavioral modalities contribute
to the prediction of emotional expressiveness?
(3) Which behavioral signals are reliably related to emotional
expressiveness? What is the nature of these relationships?
To begin answering these questions, the current study makes three
primary contributions to the literature. First, we add highly reliable
transcripts and perceptual ratings of emotional expressiveness to
an existing video database. Second, we train algorithms to predict
emotional expressiveness from visual, linguistic, and multimodal
representations of participants’ behavior and compare their per-
formance. Third, we explore what our best-performing algorithm
learned about the interpretable relationships between behavioral
signals and perceptual ratings of emotional expressiveness.
2 RELATED WORK
Although computational work on emotional expressiveness has
been rare, interdisciplinary researchers have extensively studied the
adjacent topics of personality perception and emotion recognition.
Both topics resemble the task of computationally characterizing
emotional expressiveness, as they involve inferring psychological
traits and states, respectively, from observed behavior. Therefore,
we look to research in these areas to inform our own approach
to predicting and characterizing emotional expressiveness. In this
section, we describe the current state of these areas of study.
2.1 Personality Perception
In personality computing, the prediction of personality traits as
rated by external observers is referred to as automatic personality
perception [64]. Studies in automatic personality computing typi-
cally classify whether an individual is above or below the median
on a trait (although a more rigorous approach is to predict their
dimensional scores [12, 65]). Previous models used acoustic [49, 54],
linguistic [61], and visual [5] data, often in multimodal combina-
tions. Traditional machine learning algorithms have been most
common, especially support vector machines (SVMs) [6, 45, 56],
although some interpretable approaches have been used [44].
Recently, deep learning approaches have played a larger role in
personality computing. For example, in the ChaLearn LAP chal-
lenge [50], four models achieved competitive performance out of
eight participating models. All four of these top-performing models
used convolutional neural networks (CNNs) as feature extractors;
to predict over these features, three models used deep learning
regressors, and one used support vector regression (SVR).
2.2 Emotion Recognition
Generally, efforts in emotion recognition involve either the pre-
diction of discrete emotion categories or continuous affective di-
mensions from short segments of behavior [26]. Notably, emotion
recognition differs from both automatic personality perception and
the emotional expressiveness prediction task in this paper in that it
involves computing a momentary state rather than a longer-lasting
trait. Nonetheless, emotion recognition shares many methodologi-
cal similarities with automatic personality perception.
Emotion recognition models have been trained on acoustic, lin-
guistic, visual, and multimodal data [67]. The most common ap-
proaches are machine learning classifiers including SVMs [31, 53,
63], deep belief networks [7, 59], and ensemble methods like Ad-
aBoost [39, 48, 66]. Recently, partially in response to emotion recog-
nition challenges from video like EmotiW [13–15] and AVEC [62],
multimodal deep learning models—often comprised of CNN feature
extractors over either a deep learning classifier [60] or a simpler
method like SVM [55] or logistic regression [16]—have assumed
a prominent role in emotion recognition tasks, particularly in the
classification of basic emotion categories. Extensions of this type of
architecture to multitask learning and cascade networks, as well as
experiments with generative adversarial networks and variational
autoencoders, produce the current state-of-the-art results [37].
2.3 Emotional Expressiveness
Prior work in psychology focused on refining the definition and
measurement of emotional expressiveness as a trait. Several ques-
tionnaires were developed to measure emotional expressiveness
via self-report and were used to examine its relationship with other
affective and personality attributes [21, 25, 33, 36]. These studies
found that a general disposition to outwardly display emotions
could be readily found and measured via self-report. This dispo-
sition was found to be most closely aligned with the personality
trait of extraversion (i.e., sociability, assertiveness, and activity),
although it was also related to neuroticism (i.e., anxiety, hostility,
and impulsiveness) and agreeableness (i.e., trust, compliance, and
modesty) in different contexts. Specifically, extraversion appears
to be related to increased expression of both positive and negative
emotion, whereas neuroticism appears to favor the expression of
negative emotion, and agreeableness appears to favor the expres-
sion of positive emotion [25]. It is important to note, however, that
these relationships were all modest in magnitude (e.g., correlations
were around 0.2 to 0.4 with extraversion, –0.2 to 0.3 with neuroti-
cism, and 0.0 to 0.2 with agreeableness), which supports the idea
that emotional expressiveness is related to but still distinct from
these broader personality traits.
Human observers have also been used to measure how emotion-
ally expressive a person appears to be within a given interaction
Toward Multimodal Modeling of Emotional Expressiveness
ICMI ’20, October 25–29, 2020, Utrecht, the Netherlands
second author. Word-level agreement was high (95.1%) on this sub-
set of participants, which provides evidence that the transcriptions
are trustworthy overall.
Self-reported personality traits were measured using the NEO-
FFI [9], a 60-item inventory yielding scale scores on the “Big Five”
personality traits: neuroticism, extraversion, openness to experi-
ence, agreeableness, and conscientiousness traits.1 This inventory
was completed by participants prior to the interaction.
4 MEASURING EXPRESSIVENESS
In order to measure how emotionally expressive each participant in
the GFT dataset was, we paid human annotators to watch and rate
each video. To mitigate the influence of annotator subjectivity, each
video was rated by multiple annotators, and ratings were averaged
per video [51]. Moreover, to increase the reliability and validity of
these ratings, annotators completed multiple items (i.e., questions)
measuring different aspects of emotional expressiveness, which
we combined into a single score per video using latent variable
modeling [34]. Although they take longer to complete, multiple-
item scales are generally preferred to single-item scales because
the latter tend to be quite noisy (i.e., lack reliability), struggle to
capture the complexity and nuance of many attributes (i.e., lack
validity), and can lead to incorrect analytical conclusions [11]. In
this section, we describe the process of collecting these perceptual
ratings and conducting the latent variable analysis.
4.1 Perceptual Ratings
Human annotators were recruited through the Prolific.co online
research platform. In order to better assess annotator quality and
consistency, we wanted each annotator to rate multiple videos.
However, requiring each annotator to rate all the videos might lead
to fatigue or dropout. To balance these two concerns, we separated
the 96 participant videos into 6 sets of 16 videos and assigned a
different group of annotators to rate each set. To minimize the influ-
ence of cultural and sensory differences, annotators were required
to have USA nationality, English language fluency, and normal (or
corrected to normal) vision and hearing. To ensure high-quality
ratings, annotators were required to have a prior approval rate of
95% or higher, and annotators were replaced if they failed one or
more attention check questions during our experiment. For each
set of videos, we recruited eight crowdworkers to serve as raters.
After three annotators were replaced for failing attention checks,
the final sample of 48 annotators was 63% Female, 60% White, and
ranged in age from 19 to 60 years old (M = 30.2, S D = 10.3).
Using the formr online survey platform [2], annotators viewed
instructions and then rated each video in their assigned set. Anno-
tators were instructed to watch each video (from start to finish at
normal speed and with the volume on) and then carefully answer a
series of 12 questions about how they perceived the person in the
video. In this study, we focused on a subset of 4 of these questions
that captured different aspects of emotional expressiveness.
Although previous work described in subsection 2.3 developed
methods for measuring emotional expressiveness, many of these
self-report items were difficult to adapt to observational research
(e.g., “The way I feel is different from how others think I feel”)
and previous observational studies used single-item measures (e.g.,
Figure 1: Example frames from the GFT database
[36, 57]. However, these studies did not explore which specific be-
havioral signals the observers used to make their ratings. It is thus
unclear which aspects of communicative behavior are most expres-
sive. Recently, we sought to address this gap in the literature by
automatically predicting facial expressiveness and quantifying its
behavioral correlates on a moment-to-moment basis using the Elas-
tic Net algorithm [38]. This work informs our choice of methods
in the current paper but differs in a number of important ways.
First, whereas the previous study examined expressiveness using
only visual representations of behavior, the current study also ex-
amines linguistic and multimodal representations—both of which
have been shown to be crucial in studies on personality comput-
ing and emotion recognition—in addition to visual representations.
Second, whereas the previous study examined expressiveness on
a momentary time-scale, the current study examines holistic pat-
terns of expressiveness over a longer time period to better capture
emotional expressiveness as an enduring pattern of behavior. Fi-
nally, whereas the previous study examined induced responses to
emotional stimuli, the current study examines expressive behavior
in a more naturalistic and unstructured social interaction setting.
3 DATA
The videos examined in this work came from the Sayette Group
Formation Task (GFT) spontaneous facial expression database [24].
This database includes videos of 96 participants (42% Female, 85%
White) observed during a psychology experiment [52]. In this ex-
periment, a group of three participants would meet for the first
time and get to know one another over the course of 36 min; this
time was unstructured, and groups could discuss whatever topics
they wished. The GFT database includes 1 min videos of each group,
starting an average of 5.6 min into the interaction. Separate wall-
mounted cameras faced each participant and recorded a 720 × 480
pixel video of their head and shoulders at a rate of 29.97 fps. Exam-
ple frames from these videos can be found in Figure 1.
Audio during the experiment was recorded from a single cen-
trally located microphone.1 In order to measure language-related
behaviors, we manually transcribed text from the audio recordings.
The speech of all 96 participants was transcribed by the first au-
thor and, for the purposes of assessing transcription reliability, the
speech from a subset of 30 participants was also transcribed by the
1 The audio recordings and personality scores were not released as part of the official
GFT database distribution [24]. We were granted special access for this study.
ICMI ’20, October 25–29, 2020, Utrecht, the Netherlands
Lin, Girard, Sayette, and Morency
Figure 2: Inter-annotator reliability as measured by intra-
class correlation coefficients (with 95% confidence intervals)
rating videos on “expressiveness”), which we previously noted can
attenuate reliability and validity. As such, we decided to design new
questions to be used in a multiple-item scale. We chose four items
to balance the competing needs for comprehensiveness (which
requires more items) and efficiency (which requires fewer).
(1) How expressive was the person in this video (use your own
understanding of what it means to be expressive)?
(2) How much did the person in this video show their emotions
(through their words and nonverbal behavior)?
(3) How animated (lively, energetic, or active) was the person
in this video?
(4) How much did the person in this video react to the other
people (through their words and nonverbal behavior)?
The first question represented the single-item measures used in
previous observational studies, and the second question captured
the theoretical definition of emotional expressiveness. The third
and fourth questions were more exploratory and were our attempts
to represent other observable aspects of emotional expressiveness.
Specifically, the third question attempted to capture the idea that
emotions are often strongly expressed through movement and ac-
tivity, and the fourth question attempted to capture the idea that
emotions (and therefore emotional expressions) are reactions to en-
vironmental (and often social) stimuli. All questions were carefully
worded to generalize across all emotions and behavioral modal-
ities. Each question was answered using a rating scale with five
categorical options ranging from 0 (not at all ) to 4 (extremely ).
The inter-annotator reliability of the perceptual ratings was cal-
culated per question using the agreement software package [23].
Intraclass correlation coefficients (ICCs) under model 2A [27] were
calculated to estimate the reliability of the average of all eight an-
notators’ scores. ICC values above 0.50, 0.75, and 0.90 are generally
considered to be evidence of moderate, good, and excellent reliabil-
ity, respectively [35]. Note that these ICCs are more conservative
than Pearson correlation coefficients [41]. As shown in Figure 2,
reliability estimates were all in the good range, and confidence
intervals (CIs) did not extend below the moderate range.
4.2 Latent Variable Modeling
After being averaged across raters, scores on the four expressiveness-
related questions were highly inter-correlated (all r > 0.83), which
supports the feasibility of combining these scores into a single
lower-dimensional representation. The simplest way to combine
Figure 3: Path diagram of the CFA model (ovals are latent
variables, rectangles are manifest/observed variables, λ are
factor loadings, and ε are residual variances)
the scores would have been to sum or average them, but to do so
would assume that all questions are equally important and equally
well-measured; these assumptions are unlikely to be met in practice
and would negatively impact the validity and reliability of the ag-
gregate if violated [42]. Thus, to avoid these assumptions, we used
confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) [34] to estimate a latent variable
η that explains the variance shared among the questions (Figure 3).
In this model, factor loadings represent how much of each question
was composed of shared variance (i.e., how strong the relationship
was between the question and the latent variable), and residual
variances represent how much each question was composed of
non-shared variance (i.e., unique variance and measurement error).
Because these model parameters are freely estimated (i.e., informed
by the data), the latent variable η will be a better representation of
the shared variance than a sum or average would be [42].
The CFA model was estimated in a Bayesian framework using
Markov Chain Monte Carlo in the blavaan software package [43].
All latent and manifest variables were standardized to zero mean
and unit variance. Normal priors (µ = 0, σ = 1) were used for the
intercept and factor loading parameters, and gamma priors (α = 1,
β = 1) were used for the precision (i.e., residual standard deviation)
parameters. Four Markov chains were estimated, each with 1000
warmup and 1000 inference iterations.
We evaluated the fit of the CFA model using Bayesian versions
of two common fit indexes that are known to not be biased when
calculated in small samples [22]: the gamma-hat fit index ( ˆΓ ), which
is based on the noncentral chi-square distribution, and the compar-
ative fit index (CFI), which compares the proposed model to both a
baseline model (in which all covariances are set to zero) and a satu-
rated model (in which all covariances are freely estimated). Both of
these indexes range from 0 to 1 and are commonly interpreted as
being indicative of good model fit when above 0.950 [30].
The fit of the CFA model was good according to both fit indexes
( ˆΓ = 0.981, CFI = 0.993). Table 1 provides a summary of the model’s
parameter estimates. All four questions had strongly positive load-
ings on the latent variable, which shows that they shared a great
deal of variance (i.e., tended to vary together) and supports our
argument that they measured a single underlying attribute [20].
To further validate our latent variable as a measure of emotional
expressiveness (as opposed to some other quantity), we extracted
Toward Multimodal Modeling of Emotional Expressiveness
ICMI ’20, October 25–29, 2020, Utrecht, the Netherlands
Table 1: Results from the Bayesian CFA model
5.1 Visual Behavioral Signals
λ1
λ2
Parameter
Expressive Factor Loading
Emotions Factor Loading
λ3 Animated Factor Loading
λ4 Reactive Factor Loading
Expressive Residual Variance
Emotions Residual Variance
ε3 Animated Residual Variance
Reactive Residual Variance
ε1
ε2
ε4
Estimate
0.97
0.95
0.96
0.87
0.07
0.11
0.08
0.24
95% CI
[ 0.84, 1.14 ]
[ 0.81, 1.11 ]
[ 0.83, 1.13 ]
[ 0.72, 1.05 ]
[ 0.04, 0.10 ]
[ 0.07, 0.16 ]
[ 0.05, 0.12 ]
[ 0.18, 0.33 ]
factor scores (i.e., estimates of each participant’s standing on the
latent variable η ) and assessed their pattern of correlation with
participants’ self-reported personality traits. If our latent variable
is a good estimate of emotional expressiveness, this pattern of
correlation should match expectations based on theory and previous
work [20]. Based on the literature reviewed in subsection 2.3, we
expected the factor scores to be moderately positively correlated
with extraversion, weakly positively correlated with agreeableness,
and weakly positively or negatively correlated with neuroticism
depending on the negativity versus positivity of the context.
The factor scores were positively correlated with extraversion
(0.26) and agreeableness (0.28) and slightly negatively correlated
with neuroticism (–0.07). These results largely matched expecta-
tions, although the correlation with agreeableness was a bit larger
than expected. These differences may be due in part to the context
of the GFT study, wherein participants interacted with strangers
(e.g., agreeable participants may be especially expressive in this con-
text due to higher interpersonal trust and cooperation). The weak
negative correlation with neuroticism suggests that this context
may attenuate displays of negative emotion (e.g., to make a good
first impression). Given this evidence of the latent variable’s inter-
nal consistency and external validity, we felt confident using the
factor scores as labels of emotional expressiveness in our predictive
modeling experiments [42].
5 MEASURING BEHAVIOR
In order to study the ways in which emotional expressiveness
manifests in communicative behavior, we needed to measure partic-
ipants’ behavior. To do so, we designed measures of various visual
and linguistic behavioral signals from the video recordings and
transcripts. We based our choice of behavioral signals on measures
that had been used successfully in personality perception and emo-
tion recognition, as described in the literature reviewed in Section
2.3. We decided not to include measures of acoustic behaviors (e.g.,
speech prosody) because of the high likelihood of imperfect audio
source separation among the three participants in each group, par-
ticularly given the suboptimal recording quality and the frequency
with which subjects spoke simultaneously. However, we do believe
that acoustic behavioral signals are important to expressiveness
and plan to explore them in future work after experimenting with
different approaches for source separation.
For each participant’s video, we used the OpenFace 2.0 [3] toolkit
to derive measures of visual behavioral signals. We began with
frame-level estimates of the occurrence and intensity of action
units (i.e., facial muscle movements) from the Facial Action Coding
System [19], facial landmark (e.g., eye and mouth) coordinates,
head pose (i.e., translation and rotation), and eye gaze angle. To
reduce the effects of jitter, we averaged these measures over five-
frame intervals, reducing the sampling rate from 30 Hz to 6 Hz.
Furthermore, we used an affine transformation [29] to project each
participant’s facial landmark coordinates onto the average of all
participant faces. This normalized the faces for size, translation, and
rotation and isolated landmark movement from head movement.
We then calculated the average number of action units present
and the mean of all action units’ intensities across all intervals. Our
decision to aggregate all action units was motivated by a desire to
capture overall facial movement without requiring OpenFace to
reliably distinguish individual action units, which is a difficult task
(especially when generalizing to novel datasets) [8]. To measure
the overall magnitude and speed of participants’ facial and head
motion, we computed the average displacement (i.e., distance trav-
eled), velocity (i.e., the derivative of displacement), and acceleration
(i.e., the derivative of velocity) for each facial landmark, head pose
dimension, and eye gaze angle across five-frame intervals. Because
measures for the individual facial landmark points were highly
correlated, we summed across all landmark points. A full list of the
20 included visual behavioral signals can be found in Table 2.
5.2 Linguistic Behavioral Signals
For each participant’s transcript, we used the LIWC2015 [47] text
analysis program to derive measures of their linguistic behavior
across all utterances. LIWC2015 returns many measures that repre-
sent the percentage of the words in the text that fall into different
categories (e.g., personal pronouns, common verbs, or swear words)
as well as the output of several algorithms trained to predict lin-
guistic dimensions (e.g., emotional tone, authenticity, and clout).
We selected categories and dimensions to include in our anal-
yses based on several considerations. Because we were analyzing
spoken words, we excluded measures that assume written text (e.g.,
punctuation and words per sentence). We prioritized categories and
dimensions related to affective, social, and psychological processes
(e.g., emotional tone, affiliation, and cognition). We also included
categories related to parts of speech and language construction
(e.g., pronouns, verbs, and fillers).
In general, we chose to group linguistic behavioral signals into
broader categories rather than including each individual category
returned by LIWC2015 in order to reduce dimensionality and in-
crease category reliability through aggregation. A full list of the 35
included linguistic behavioral signals can be found in Table 2.
6 PREDICTIVE MODELING
We used predictive modeling techniques to explore our three re-
search questions: (1) How well can we predict emotional expressive-
ness from multimodal representations of participantsâĂŹ behavior?
(2) How much do the different behavioral modalities contribute to
ICMI ’20, October 25–29, 2020, Utrecht, the Netherlands
Lin, Girard, Sayette, and Morency
Table 2: List of behavioral signals by modality
Visual
Linguistic
Mean Number of Action Units
Word Count
Mean Action Unit Intensity
Analytical Thinking
Mean Landmark Displacement
Clout
Mean Landmark Velocity
Authentic
Mean Landmark Acceleration
Emotional Tone
Head Translation Displacement Words > 6 Letters
Head Translation Velocity
Personal Pronouns
Head Translation Acceleration
Impersonal Pronouns
Head Pitch Displacement
Common Adverbs
Head Pitch Velocity
Negations
Head Pitch Acceleration
Common Verbs
Head Yaw Displacement
Common Adjectives
Head Yaw Velocity
Comparisons
Head Yaw Acceleration
Interrogatives
Head Roll Displacement
Quantifiers
Head Roll Velocity
Positive Emotion
Head Roll Acceleration
Negative Emotion
Gaze Angle Displacement
Social Processes
Gaze Angle Velocity
Gaze Angle Acceleration
Cognitive Processes
Sexual
Ingestion
Affiliation
Reward
Risk
Past Focus
Present Focus
Future Focus
Work
Leisure
Home
Money
Swear words
Assent
Nonfluencies
Fillers
the prediction of emotional expressiveness? (3) Which behavioral
signals are reliably related to emotional expressiveness?
6.1 Algorithms
To investigate our first two questions, we needed predictive model-
ing algorithms that are well understood and well performing when
trained on relatively small datasets. To investigate our third ques-
tion, we needed at least one algorithm that could achieve competi-
tive performance while providing interpretable results regarding
the direction and strength of the relationship between each feature
and label. Based on our literature review and prior experience, we
decided to include the three algorithms described below.2
Elastic Net. This algorithm uses a mixture of L1 and L2 regulariza-
tion on linear regression to reduce overfitting and multicollinearity,
both of which are common problems when fitting linear models
to data with many features [68]. Elastic Net models are fully inter-
pretable, with the regression coefficients providing an indication of
the direction and strength of the relationship between the features
and the label. Our past work on visual expressiveness [38] found
that Elastic Net’s predictive performance exceeded that of several
more complex models when trained on a small dataset.
Support Vector Regression (SVR). This algorithm transforms data
into a higher-dimensional feature space and constructs a hyper-
plane that maximizes the number of points within some distance
from it [17]. Because Elastic Net models linear relationships only,
we selected SVR with a radial basis function (RBF) kernel as a com-
peting model to see whether modeling nonlinearities would yield
better performance (at the cost of being able to interpret the re-
lationships between features and labels). As described in Section
2, SVR and SVM have seen widespread use in the related fields of
automatic personality perception and emotion recognition.
2Our goal in comparing multiple algorithms was not to determine which is best in
general but rather to find one that performed well in this application. Proposing new
algorithms is an interesting direction for future research but is beyond the scope of
the current paper. Here, we focus on introducing a new topic area to the community
and using existing algorithms to deepen scientific understanding of it.
Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP). Neural network models currently
set the standard of performance for many relevant prediction tasks
(as described in Section 2) due to their ability to capture complex
nonlinear relationships (at the cost of interpretability, like SVR).
Due to the relatively small size of our dataset and the absence of a
temporal component, we constrained the complexity of our model
to a simple MLP with one or two hidden layers.
6.2 Experimental Setup
To explore our second research question about the relative impor-
tance of each modality, we fit three models per algorithm: one model
using only visual behavioral signals as features, one model using
only linguistic behavioral signals as features, and one multimodal
model using both sets of behavioral signals as features.
We performed 7-fold validation within 8-fold testing and re-
peated this process 20 times with different splits of the data. The
folds were stratified to keep the proportion of labels in each quartile
similar in each fold, and all three members of a given group were
always assigned to the same fold (in order to prevent group-level de-
pendencies from influencing performance estimates). Within each
repetition, the folds were identical across algorithms and modalities
to ensure that results were directly comparable. Root mean square
error (RMSE) was used as the validation error measure.
We used the sklearn implementations of these algorithms in our
experiments and tuned hyperparameters via grid search. For Elastic
Net, we tuned over α ∈ {0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 0.5, 1.0, 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 1.5}
and λ ∈ {0.0, 0.1, 0.5, 0.7, 0.9, 0.95, 0.99, 1.0} , where α is the penalty
term weight and λ is the mixing parameter for L1 and L2 regulariza-
tion. When λ = 0.0, Elastic Net becomes ridge regression, and when
λ = 1.0, it becomes lasso regression [68]. For SVR, we tuned over
C ∈ {2−5 , 2−4 , . . . , 214 , 215 } and γ ∈ {2−15 , 2−14 , . . . , 22 , 23 } , where
C controls the strength of L2 regularization and γ is the RBF kernel
coefficient. For MLP regression, we tuned over the number of hid-
den layers (one or two), the number of hidden units per layer (64 or
128), and the L2 regularization term α ∈ {0.0001, 0.001, 0.01, 0.05,
0.1, 0.5, 1.0, 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 1.5, 1.7, 1.9, 2.0, 3.0, 4.0, 5.0} .
To evaluate predictive performance during testing, we used three
complementary performance metrics. First, we used RMSE as a
measure of the distance between the predictions and labels in the
same units as the labels. Given that the labels were standardized
to have a standard deviation of 1, a perfect model would have
RMSE = 0.0, a model always predicting the mean would have
RMSE = 1.0, and a model with RMSE > 1.0 would be worse than a
model always predicting the mean. Second, we used the coefficient
of determination (R 2 ) as an estimate of the proportion of label
variance explained by the features in a model. A perfect model
would have R 2 = 1.0, a model always predicting the mean would
have R 2 = 0.0, and a model with R 2 < 0.0 would be worse than
a model always predicting the mean. Third, we used the Pearson
correlation coefficient (r ) as a standardized measure of the strength
of the relationship between the predictions and labels. A perfect
model would have r = 1.0, an uninformative model would have
r = 0.0, and a model with r < 0.0 would be misleading. Unlike the
other two metrics, correlation does not require that the predictions
and labels be identical—only that they be linearly related.
Toward Multimodal Modeling of Emotional Expressiveness
ICMI ’20, October 25–29, 2020, Utrecht, the Netherlands
Table 3: Performance of predictive models
Table 4: Comparison of modalities for Elastic Net
Algorithm Modality
Elastic Net Visual
Elastic Net
Linguistic
Elastic Net Multimodal
SVR
Visual
SVR
Linguistic
SVR
Multimodal
MLP
Visual
MLP
Linguistic
MLP
Multimodal
RMSE
0.89
0.76
0.65
0.87
0.75
0.78
0.89
0.76
0.72
R 2
−0.03
0.30
0.45
0.05
0.34
0.27
0.02
0.30
0.36
r
0.45
0.65
0.74
0.44
0.66
0.63
0.43
0.65
0.68
∆
0.16
0.25
0.10
Difference in RMSE
Visual – Linguistic
Visual – Multimodal
Linguistic – Multimodal
Difference in R 2
−0.31
Visual – Linguistic
Visual – Multimodal
−0.46
Linguistic – Multimodal −0.17
Difference in r
Visual – Linguistic
−0.21
−0.30
Visual – Multimodal
Linguistic – Multimodal −0.11
∆
∆
p
p
95% CI
[ 0.11, 0.18] < .001
[ 0.22, 0.27] < .001
[ 0.08, 0.11] < .001
95% CI
[−0.36, −0.19] < .001
[−0.53, −0.41] < .001
[−0.21, −0.15] < .001
95% CI
[−0.27, −0.14] < .001
[−0.34, −0.25] < .001
[−0.13, −0.09] < .001
p
Figure 4: Performance of Elastic Net models by modality
To compare the performance of models trained using different
features, we used non-parametric bootstrap resampling with per-
centile confidence intervals and p -values [18]. Specifically, we cre-
ated 2000 resamples (n = 160) of the fold-level differences between
models (through sampling with replacement) and, as in Table 3,
calculated the median as a robust measure of central tendency.
6.3 Predictive Modeling Results
Because we had eight test folds in each of the 20 repetitions of our
cross-validation procedure, our experiment yielded a distribution
of 160 scores on each performance metric. In Table 3, we present
the median of each distribution as a robust measure of its central
tendency. A full record of the results for all models is provided in
the supplemental materials.
Research Question 1. To investigate our first research question about
the prediction of emotional expressiveness from behavioral signals,
we examined the best performing algorithm-modality combination:
Elastic Net using multimodal behavioral signals as features. The pre-
dictions of this model were an average of 0.65 standard deviations
from the corresponding label values, the features explained nearly
half (45%) of the variance in the labels, and the predictions were
highly correlated with the labels (0.74). The strength of the correla-
tion in particular suggests that the predictions of this model could
be used as a proxy for human ratings in settings where preserving
Figure 5: Coefficients from multimodal Elastic Net models
linear relationships is sufficient. However, the fact that more than
half of the variance in the labels was unexplained by the features
suggests that there is still more to emotional expressiveness than
what our behavioral measures were able to capture.
We suspect that much of the unexplained variance is related to
acoustic behavioral signals (e.g., speech prosody); the rest may be
related to visual and linguistic signals that our representations did
not capture (e.g., specific facial actions or gestures) or cultural and
individual differences in patterns of expressive behavior.
Research Question 2. To investigate our second research question
about the relative importance of the visual and linguistic modalities
(given our selected behavioral representations), we compared the
performance of the three Elastic Net models. The results of the
modality comparison are provided in Table 4.
Our first finding was that the linguistic model significantly out-
performed the visual model on all performance metrics. This re-
sult may suggest that emotional expressiveness is conveyed more
through linguistic behavioral signals than through visual behavioral
signals. Alternatively, it may suggest that our linguistic represen-
tations (based on manual transcripts) were more reliable than our
visual representations (based on automatic tracking).
ICMI ’20, October 25–29, 2020, Utrecht, the Netherlands
Lin, Girard, Sayette, and Morency
Our second finding was that the multimodal model significantly
outperformed the the visual model and the linguistic model on all
performance metrics. These results suggest that both modalities
made unique contributions to the prediction and that both are worth
including in future work on emotional expressiveness.
Research Question 3. To investigate our third research question
about the relationships between specific behavioral signals and
emotional expressiveness, we examined the distributions of the re-
gression coefficients across all tuned multimodal Elastic Net models.
Figure 5 depicts the distributions with a nonzero median (and all
distributions are depicted in the supplemental materials).
With a median coefficient of around 0.4, the total number of
words spoken (Word Count ) was the behavioral signal with the
strongest relationship to emotional expressiveness. As language is
a primary channel of human communication, it is not surprising
that participants rated higher on emotional expressiveness tended
to speak more. That is, speaking more likely gave participants
additional opportunities to express themselves.
Two other behavioral signals had median coefficients around
0.2: the average magnitude of all facial movements (Mean Action
Unit Intensity) and the proportion of words that fell in the Social
Processes category (e.g., family and friends). In general, more intense
facial movements correspond to stronger emotion [32], and since
we define emotional expressiveness as the tendency to outwardly
display emotion, it follows that participants who show stronger
emotion are more expressive. This result is also consistent with our
prior findings on the role of action unit intensity in momentary
emotional expressiveness [38]. The relationship between the Social
Processes linguistic signal and emotional expressiveness suggests
a link between sociability and emotional expressiveness that is
consistent with the correlation between emotional expressiveness
and self-reported extraversion observed in this study and others
[25, 36]. Specifically, individuals who socialize more (or who speak
more about their social habits and activities) may tend to be more
expressive not only of such activities but also of their emotions.
Finally, five other behavioral signals had median coefficients
between 0.0 and 0.1 or between 0.0 and −0.1. Participants rated
higher on emotional expressiveness had more facial movements
(Mean Number of Action Units), more words that fell in the Leisure
category (e.g., cook, chat, movie), higher scores on the Clout di-
mension (i.e., speaking with confidence and authority), more words
longer than six letters (Words > 6 Letters), and smaller vertical head
motions (Head Pitch Displacement ). Some of the relationships be-
tween these signals (i.e., number of action units and leisure words)
are fairly similar in their interpretation to the relationships de-
scribed in the previous paragraph. We also believe that the last
finding—the negative coefficient for vertical head motion—may re-
flect that highly expressive participants spend more time talking
and less time listening (as nodding is often a sign of listening [46]).
The associations between emotional expressiveness and Clout and
long words are more novel. These results point to possible positive
relationships between emotional expressiveness and assertiveness
(a facet of extraversion). Individuals who exhibit greater confidence
in word choice, whether through more dominant or more advanced
vocabulary, may tend to be more emotionally expressive.
7 DISCUSSION
In this paper, we added highly reliable transcripts of spoken words
and human perceptual ratings of emotional expressiveness to an
existing video database of unstructured social interactions. We
proposed and tested a series of models encompassing traditional
statistical modeling and machine learning to predict emotional ex-
pressiveness from visual and linguistic features. Encouragingly, we
found that the multimodal statistical model (Elastic Net) performed
reasonably well, explaining nearly half of the variance in the percep-
tual ratings. We then examined what this model learned in predict-
ing emotional expressiveness from behavioral signals. Our results
uncovered novel relationships between emotional expressiveness
and behaviors related to traits like sociability, assertiveness, and
confidence. Our most important visual features—those derived from
action unit measures—converge with prior findings on the predic-
tion and characterization of facial expressiveness in a very different
context [38]. The consistency of these results suggests a persistent
role of facial action units in signaling emotional expressiveness.
Our results should be considered in light of several points. First,
the GFT dataset (like many others in affective computing) included
only healthy young adults from a single geographic area, and it is
unknown how well our findings would generalize to other popu-
lations. Second, the context of the participants’ behavior (i.e., the
group formation task) was unstructured and more naturalistic than
previous work, but the interactions still took place in a laboratory
setting. Finally, the relatively small size of the dataset (in terms of
both the number of participants and the amount of time each partic-
ipant was observed) likely limited the performance our predictive
models were able to achieve. These limitations can all be addressed
through more research in additional populations and contexts, and
we hope this paper will serve to encourage other interdisciplinary
researchers to study emotional expressiveness.
In conclusion, we laid the foundation for the computational
study of emotional expressiveness, which captures to the degree
to which a person tends to outwardly display their emotions. We
developed a method to collect human ratings of emotional expres-
siveness with high reliability and used latent variable modeling
techniques to refine these ratings. We then constructed models
to predict and characterize these ratings in terms of interpretable
visual and linguistic behavioral signals. This line of research holds
the potential to improve emotional inferences through personalized
(i.e., expressiveness-aware) algorithms, develop more satisfying and
efficient robots and virtual agents, and aid medical professionals in
the assessment of psychiatric and neurological conditions.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This paper is based upon work supported by the National Sci-
ence Foundation (Awards 1722822 and 1734868) and National In-
stitutes of Health (Awards R01-AA015773, R01-MH096951, U01-
MH116925, and U01-MH116923). Any opinions and recommenda-
tions expressed in this material are those of the authors alone.
SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIALS
All source code from this paper can be found at https://osf.io/umzar/.
The Sayette GFT database [24] is freely available for academic
purposes (to request access, view the wiki at https://osf.io/7wcyz/).
Toward Multimodal Modeling of Emotional Expressiveness
ICMI ’20, October 25–29, 2020, Utrecht, the Netherlands
[23] Jeffrey M. Girard. 2020. agreement: An R Package for the Tidy Analysis of
Agreement and Reliability. https://github.com/jmgirard/agreement
[24] Jeffrey M. Girard, Wen-Sheng Chu, Laszlo A. Jeni, Jeffrey F. Cohn, F. De La Torre,
and Michael A. Sayette. 2017. Sayette Group Formation Task (GFT) Sponta-
neous Facial Expression Database. In Proceedings of the 12th IEEE International
Conference on Automatic Face and Gesture Recognition. IEEE, Washington, DC,
581–588.
[25] James J. Gross and Oliver P. John. 1995. Facets of Emotional Expressivity: Three
Self-Report Factors and Their Correlates. Personality and Individual Differences
19, 4 (1995), 555–568.
[26] Hatice Gunes and Björn W. Schuller. 2013. Categorical and Dimensional Affect
Analysis in Continuous Input: Current Trends and Future Directions. Image and
Vision Computing 31, 2 (2013), 120–136.
[27] Kilem L. Gwet. 2014. Handbook of Inter-Rater Reliability: The Definitive Guide to
Measuring the Extent of Agreement among Raters (fourth ed.). Advanced Analytics,
Gaithersburg, MD.
[28] Adriana Hamacher, Nadia Bianchi-Berthouze, Anthony G. Pipe, and Kerstin
Eder. 2016. Believing in BERT: Using Expressive Communication to Enhance
Trust and Counteract Operational Error in Physical Human-Robot Interaction.
In Proceedings of the 25th IEEE International Symposium on Robot and Human
Interactive Communication. IEEE, New York, NY, 493–500.
[29] Richard I. Hartley and Andrew Zisserman. 2004. Multiple View Geometry in
Computer Vision (second ed.). Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England.
[30] Li-tze Hu and Peter M. Bentler. 1999. Cutoff Criteria for Fit Indexes in Covariance
Structure Analysis: Conventional Criteria versus New Alternatives. Structural
Equation Modeling 6 (1999), 1–55.
REFERENCES
[1] American Psychiatric Association. 2013. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders (fifth ed.). American Psychiatric Association, Washington, DC.
[2] Ruben C. Arslan, Matthias P. Walther, and Cyril S. Tata. 2020. Formr: A Study
Framework Allowing for Automated Feedback Generation and Complex Lon-
gitudinal Experience-Sampling Studies Using R. Behavior Research Methods 52
(2020), 376–387.
[3] Tadas Baltrusaitis, Amir Zadeh, Yao Chong Lim, and Louis-Philippe Morency.
2018. OpenFace 2.0: Facial Behavior Analysis Toolkit. In Proceedings of the 13th
IEEE International Conference on Automatic Face and Gesture Recognition. IEEE,
Xi’an, China, 59–66.
[4] Lisa Feldman Barrett, Ralph Adolphs, Stacy Marsella, Aleix M. Martinez, and
Seth D. Pollak. 2019. Emotional Expressions Reconsidered: Challenges to Inferring
Emotion from Human Facial Movements. Psychological Science in the Public
Interest 20, 1 (2019), 1–68.
[5] Joan-Isaac Biel and Daniel Gatica-Perez. 2012. The youtube lens: Crowdsourced
personality impressions and audiovisual analysis of vlogs. IEEE Transactions on
Multimedia 15, 1 (2012), 41–55.
[6] Clément Chastagnol and Laurence Devillers. 2012. Personality Traits Detection
using a Parallelized Modified SFFS Algorithm. In Proceedings of the 13th Annual
Conference of the International Speech Communication Association. ISCA, Portland,
OR, 266–269.
[7] Ira Cohen, Nicu Sebe, Ashutosh Garg, Lawrence S. Chen, and Thomas S. Huang.
2003. Facial Expression Recognition from Video Sequences: Temporal and Static
Modeling. Computer Vision and Image Understanding 91, 1-2 (2003), 160–187.
[8] Jeffrey F. Cohn, Itir Onal Ertugrul, Wen-Sheng Chu, Jeffrey M. Girard, and Zakia
Hammal. 2019. Affective Facial Computing: Generalizability across Domains.
In Multimodal Behavior Analysis in the Wild: Advances and Challenges, Xavier
Alameda-Pineda, Elisa Ricci, and Nicu Sebe (Eds.). Academic Press, Cambridge,
MA, 407–441.
[9] Paul T. Costa and Robert R. McCrae. 1992. Revised NEO Personality Inventory
(NEO PI-R) and NEO Five-Factor Inventory (NEO-FFI). Psychological Assessment
Resources, Odessa, FL.
[10] Alan Cowen, Disa Sauter, Jessica L. Tracy, and Dacher Keltner. 2019. Mapping
the Passions: Toward a High-Dimensional Taxonomy of Emotional Experience
and Expression. Psychological Science in the Public Interest 20, 1 (2019), 69–90.
[11] Marcus Credé, Peter Harms, Sarah Niehorster, and Andrea Gaye-Valentine. 2012.
An Evaluation of the Consequences of Using Short Measures of the Big Five
Personality Traits. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 102, 4 (2012),
874–888.
[12] Jamie DeCoster, Anne-Marie R. Iselin, and Marcello Gallucci. 2009. A Conceptual
and Empirical Examination of Justifications for Dichotomization. Psychological
Methods 14, 4 (2009), 349–366.
[13] Abhinav Dhall, Roland Goecke, Jyoti Joshi, Michael Wagner, and Tom Gedeon.
2013. Emotion Recognition in the Wild Challenge 2013. In Proceedings of the
15th ACM on International Conference on Multimodal Interaction. ACM, Sydney,
Australia, 509–516.
[14] Abhinav Dhall, Amanjot Kaur, Roland Goecke, and Tom Gedeon. 2018. EmotiW
2018: Audio-Video, Student Engagement and Group-level Affect Prediction. In
Proceedings of the 20th ACM International Conference on Multimodal Interaction.
ACM, Boulder, CO, 653–656.
[15] Abhinav Dhall, O. V. Ramana Murthy, Roland Goecke, Jyoti Joshi, and Tom
Gedeon. 2015. Video and image based emotion recognition challenges in the
wild: Emotiw 2015. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM International Conference on
Multimodal Interaction. ACM, Seattle, WA, 423–426.
[16] Jeff Donahue, Yangqing Jia, Oriol Vinyals, Judy Hoffman, Ning Zhang, Eric Tzeng,
and Trevor Darrell. 2014. Decaf: A deep convolutional activation feature for
generic visual recognition. In Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on
Machine Learning. IMLS, Beijing, China, 647–655.
[17] Harris Drucker, Christopher J. C. Burges, Linda Kaufman, Alex J. Smola, and
Vladimir Vapnik. 1997. Support Vector Regression Machines. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, Vol. 9. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 155–
161.
[18] Bradley Efron and Robert J. Tibshirani. 1993. An Introduction to the Bootstrap.
Chapman and Hall, New York, NY.
[19] Paul Ekman, Wallace V. Friesen, and John Hager. 2002. Facial Action Coding
System: A Technique for the Measurement of Facial Movement. Research Nexus,
Salt Lake City, UT.
[20] Jessica K. Flake, Jolynn Pek, and Eric Hehman. 2017. Construct Validation in
Social and Personality Research: Current Practice and Recommendations. Social
Psychological and Personality Science 8, 4 (2017), 370–378.
[21] Howard S. Friedman, Louise M. Prince, and Ronald E. Riggio. 1980. Understanding
and Assessing Nonverbal Expressiveness: The Affective Communication Test.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 39, 2 (1980), 333–351.
[22] Mauricio Garnier-Villarreal and Terrence D. Jorgensen. 2020. Adapting Fit Indices
for Bayesian Structural Equation Modeling: Comparison to Maximum Likelihood.
Psychological Methods 25, 1 (2020), 46–70.
[31] Ashish Kapoor and Rosalind W. Picard. 2005. Multimodal Affect Recognition in
Learning Environments. In Proceedings of the 13th ACM International Conference
on Multimedia. ACM, Singapore, 677–682.
[32] Dacher Keltner, Paul Ekman, Gian C. Gonzaga, and Jennifer Beer. 2003. Facial
Expression of Emotion. In Handbook of Affective Sciences, H. Hill Goldsmith,
Klaus R. Scherer, and Richard J. Davidson (Eds.). Oxford University Press, Oxford,
England, 415–432.
[33] Laura A. King and Robert A. Emmons. 1990. Conflict over Emotional Expres-
sion: Psychological and Physical Correlates. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology 58, 5 (1990), 864–877.
[34] Rex Kline. 2015. Principles and Practice of Structural Equation Modeling (fourth
ed.). Guilford Press, New York, NY.
[35] Terry K. Koo and Mae Y. Li. 2016. A Guideline of Selecting and Reporting
Intraclass Correlation Coefficients for Reliability Research. Journal of Chiropractic
Medicine 15, 2 (2016), 155–163.
[36] Ann M. Kring, David A. Smith, and John M. Neale. 1994. Individual Differences
in Dispositional Expressiveness: Development and Validation of the Emotional
Expressivity Scale. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 66, 5 (1994),
934–949.
[37] Shan Li and Weihong Deng. 2020. Deep Facial Expression Recognition: A Survey.
IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing (2020).
[38] Victoria Lin, Jeffrey M. Girard, and Louis-Philippe Morency. 2020. Context-
Dependent Models for Predicting and Characterizing Facial Expressiveness. In
Proceedings of the AAAI-20 Workshop on Affective Content Analysis, Vol. 2614.
AAAI, New York, NY, 11–28.
[39] Gwen C. Littlewort, Marian Stewart Bartlett, and Kang Lee. 2007. Faces of Pain:
Automated Measurement of Spontaneous Facial Expressions of Genuine and
Posed Pain. In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Multimodal
Interfaces. ACM, Nagoya, Japan, 15–21.
[40] Robert R. McCrae and Paul T. Costa. 1999. A Five-Factor Theory of Personality.
In Handbook of Personality: Theory and Research (second ed.), L. A. Pervin and
O. John (Eds.). Guilford Press, New York, NY, 139–153.
[41] Kenneth O McGraw and S P Wong. 1996. Forming Inferences about Some
Intraclass Correlation Coefficients. Psychological Methods 1, 1 (1996), 30–46.
[42] Daniel McNeish and Melissa Gordon Wolf. 2020. Thinking Twice about Sum
Scores. Behavior Research Methods (2020).
[43] Edgar C. Merkle and Yves Rosseel. 2018. Blavaan: Bayesian Structural Equation
Models via Parameter Expansion. Journal of Statistical Software 85, 1 (2018),
1–30.
[44] Gelareh Mohammadi and Alessandro Vinciarelli. 2012. Automatic Personality
Perception: Prediction of Trait Attribution based on Prosodic Features.
IEEE
Transactions on Affective Computing 3, 3 (2012), 273–284.
[45] Claude Montacié and Marie-José Caraty. 2012. Pitch and Intonation Contribution
to Speakers’ Traits Classification. In Proceedings of the 13th Annual Conference of
the International Speech Communication Association. ISCA, Portland, OR, 526–529.
[46] Monisha Pasupathi, Laura L. Carstensen, Robert W. Levenson, and John M.
Gottman. 1999. Responsive listening in long-married couples: A psycholinguistic
perspective. Journal of Nonverbal Behavior 23, 2 (1999), 173–193.
[47] James W. Pennebaker, Ryan L. Boyd, Kayla Jordan, and Kate Blackburn. 2015.
The Development and Psychometric Properties of LIWC2015. University of Texas
at Austin, Austin, TX, USA.
ICMI ’20, October 25–29, 2020, Utrecht, the Netherlands
Lin, Girard, Sayette, and Morency
[48] Stavros Petridis and Maja Pantic. 2008. Audiovisual Discrimination between
Laughter and Speech. In Proceedings of the 33rd IEEE International Conference on
Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing. IEEE, Las Vegas, NV, 5117–5120.
[49] Tim Polzehl, Sebastian Moller, and Florian Metze. 2010. Automatically Assessing
Personality from Speech. In Proceedings of the 4th IEEE International Conference
on Semantic Computing. IEEE, Pittsburgh, PA, 134–140.
[50] Víctor Ponce-López, Baiyu Chen, Marc Oliu, Ciprian Corneanu, Albert Clapés,
Isabelle Guyon, Xavier Baró, Hugo Jair Escalante, and Sergio Escalera. 2016.
Chalearn lap 2016: First round challenge on first impressions-dataset and re-
sults. In European Conference on Computer Vision. Springer, Amsterdam, the
Netherlands, 400–418.
[51] Robert Rosenthal. 1982. Conducting Judgment Studies. In Handbook of Methods in
Nonverbal Behavior Research, Klaus R. Scherer and Paul Ekman (Eds.). Cambridge
University Press, New York, NY, 287–365.
[52] Michael A. Sayette, Kasey G. Creswell, John D. Dimoff, Catharine E. Fairbairn,
Jeffrey F. Cohn, Bryan W. Heckman, Thomas R. Kirchner, John M. Levine, and
Richard L. Moreland. 2012. Alcohol and Group Formation: A Multimodal Investi-
gation of the Effects of Alcohol on Emotion and Social Bonding. Psychological
Science 23, 8 (2012), 869–878.
[53] Björn Schuller, Ronald Müller, Benedikt Hörnler, Anja Höthker, Hitoshi Konosu,
and Gerhard Rigoll. 2007. Audiovisual Recognition of Spontaneous Interest within
Conversations. In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Multimodal
interfaces. ACM, Nagoya, Japan, 30–37.
[54] Björn Schuller, Stefan Steidl, Anton Batliner, Elmar Nöth, Alessandro Vinciarelli,
Felix Burkhardt, Rob van Son, Felix Weninger, Florian Eyben, Tobias Bocklet,
et al. 2012. The InterSpeech 2012 Speaker Trait Challenge. In Thirteenth Annual
Conference of the International Speech Communication Association. ISCA, Portland,
OR, 254–257.
[55] Ali Sharif Razavian, Hossein Azizpour, Josephine Sullivan, and Stefan Carlsson.
2014. CNN Features Off-the-Shelf: An Astounding Baseline for Recognition. In
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
Workshops. IEEE, Columbus, OH, 806–813.
[56] Jacopo Staiano, Bruno Lepri, Ramanathan Subramanian, Nicu Sebe, and Fabio
Pianesi. 2011. Automatic modeling of personality states in small group inter-
actions. In Proceedings of the 19th ACM International Conference on Multimedia.
ACM, Scottsdale, AZ, 989–992.
[57] Timothy J. Sullivan, Feea R. Leifker, and Amy D. Marshall. 2018. Observed
Emotional Expressivity, Posttraumatic Stress Disorder Symptoms, and Intimate
Partner Violence Perpetration among Community Couples. Journal of Traumatic
Stress 31, 3 (2018), 352–361.
[58] Auke Tellegen, David T. Lykken, Thomas J. Bouchard, Kimerly J. Wilcox, Nancy L.
Segal, and Stephen Rich. 1988. Personality Similarity in Twins Reared Apart and
Together. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 54, 6 (1988), 1031–1039.
[59] Yan Tong, Wenhui Liao, and Qiang Ji. 2007. Facial Action Unit Recognition by
Exploiting their Dynamic and Semantic Relationships.
IEEE Transactions on
Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 29, 10 (2007), 1683–1699.
[60] Panagiotis Tzirakis, George Trigeorgis, Mihalis A. Nicolaou, Björn W. Schuller,
and Stefanos Zafeiriou. 2017. End-to-End Multimodal Emotion Recognition using
Deep Neural Networks. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Processing 11, 8
(2017), 1301–1309.
[61] Fabio Valente, Samuel Kim, and Petr Motlicek. 2012. Annotation and Recog-
nition of Personality Traits in Spoken Conversations from the AMI Meetings
Corpus. In Proceedings of the 13th Annual Conference of the International Speech
Communication Association. ISCA, Portland, OR, 1183–1186.
[62] Michel F. Valstar, Björn W. Schuller, Jarek Krajewski, Roddy Cowie, and Maja
Pantic. 2014. AVEC 2014: The 4th International Audio/Visual Emotion Challenge
and Workshop. In Proceedings of the ACM International Conference on Multimedia.
ACM, Orlando, FL, 1243–1244.
[63] Laurence Vidrascu and Laurence Devillers. 2005. Detection of Real-Life Emo-
tions in Call Centers. In Proceedings of the 9th European Conference on Speech
Communication and Technology. ISCA, Lisbon, Portugal, 1841–1844.
[64] Alessandro Vinciarelli and Gelareh Mohammadi. 2014. A Survey of Personality
Computing. IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing 5, 3 (2014), 273–291.
[65] Aidan G. C. Wright. 2014. Current Directions in Personality Science and the
Potential for Advances through Computing.
Computing 5, 3 (2014), 292–296.
[66] Zhihong Zeng, Yuxiao Hu, Glenn I. Roisman, Zhen Wen, Yun Fu, and Thomas S.
Huang. 2007. Audio-visual Spontaneous Emotion Recognition.
IEEE Transactions on Affective
In Artifical
Intelligence for Human Computing. Springer, New York, NY, 72–90.
[67] Zhihong Zeng, Maja Pantic, Glenn I. Roisman, and Thomas S. Huang. 2009. A
Survey of Affect Recognition Methods: Audio, Visual, and Spontaneous Expres-
sions. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 31, 1 (2009),
39–58.
[68] Hui Zou and Trevor Hastie. 2005. Regularization and Variable Selection via the
Elastic Net. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology)
67, 2 (2005), 301–320.
