0
2
0
2
g
u
A
1
3
]
C
D
.
s
c
[
1
v
1
4
0
0
0
.
9
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a
Design and Simulation of a Hybrid Architecture
for Edge Computing in 5G and Beyond
Hamed RAHIMI∗ † § , Yvan PICAUD∗ , Salvatore COSTANZO∗ ,
Giyyarpuram MADHUSUDAN∗ , Olivier BOISSIER§ , Kamal Deep SINGH‡
∗Orange Labs, Lannion, France
§ MINES Saint-Etienne, Saint-Etienne, France
†Universit Jean Monnet, Saint-Etienne, France
‡ Tlcom Saint-Etienne, Saint-Etienne, France
Abstract—Edge Computing in 5G and Beyond is a promising
solution for ultra-low latency applications (e.g. Autonomous
Vehicle, Augmented Reality, and Remote Surgery), which have
an extraordinarily low tolerance for the delay and require fast
data processing for a very high volume of data. The require-
ments of delay-sensitive applications (e.g. Low latency, proximity,
and Location/Context-awareness) cannot be satisﬁed by Cloud
Computing due to the high latency between User Equipment
and Cloud. Nevertheless, Edge Computing in 5G and beyond
can promise an ultra-high-speed caused by placing computation
capabilities closer to endpoint devices, whereas 5G encourages
the speed rate that is 200 times faster than 4G LTE-Advanced.
This paper deeply investigates Edge Computing in 5G and
characterizes it based on the requirements of ultra-low latency
applications. As a contribution, we propose a hybrid architecture
that takes advantage of novel and sustainable technologies (e.g.
D2D communication, Massive MIMO, SDN, and NFV) and
has major features such as scalability, reliability and ultra-low
latency support. The proposed architecture is evaluated based
on an agent-based simulation that demonstrates it can satisfy
requirements and has the ability to respond to high volume
demands with low latency.
Index Terms—Internet of Things (IoT), Cloud Computing,
Edge Computing, 5G, Multi-access Edge Computing, Hybrid
Architecture, Multi-Agent Systems, Agent-based Simulation
I . IN TRODUC T ION
Nowadays, Cloud Computing [1] is the most common
option for many software vendors who are offering their
application products and services over the Internet. Cloud
Computing is a computing paradigm that offers on-demand
services to the end-users through the pool of resources such
as computation, data storage, analytics, and intelligence
[2]. The market of Cloud Computing has seen massive
growth over
the past decade. According to Statista [3],
Information technology (IT) services and business services
will bring us more than 315 billion U.S. dollars revenue
only in Europe, the Middle East, and Africa in 2023. With
the massive growth of mobile and IoT applications,
the
conventional centralized cloud computing comes upon several
challenges, such as high latency,
low Spectral Efﬁciency,
Hamed.Rahimi@etu.univ-st-etienne.fr
and non-adaptive machine type communication due to the
heavy load of data on the communication channels [4].
Moreover,
the next-generation delay-sensitive applications,
which fundamentally require quick response time and ultra-
low latency, such as Autonomous Vehicle [5] and Augmented
Reality (AR), add substantial stress on the network backhaul
links providing connection to the cloud due to the enormous
amount of data transferred [6]. To address such challenges,
researchers suggest
that we can process and analyze data
just one level away from end-users. This concept constitutes
a new computing paradigm called Edge Computing [7] that
impressively reduces latency and bandwidth demands on
network links by providing resources, services closer to the
end-user in the Edge network. Edge Computing is developed
to address the issue of high latency in delay-sensitive services
and applications that are not properly handled within the
Cloud computing paradigm [8]. In fact, the main difference
between Edge computing and Cloud computing lies in the
location of the servers. In other words, Edge Computing
complements Cloud Computing by enhancing the end-user
service to provide resources for delay-sensitive applications.
Edge Computing has advantages such as fast processing,
ultra-low latency, quick response time, real-time access to
the network information, high bandwidth, mobility support,
proximity to the user, and location awareness systems. On
the other hand, Edge Computing also faces various inevitable
challenges [9]. For
instance, Cloud Computing is more
scalable than Edge Computing, which in turn possesses
limited resource and computing power as compared to the
public cloud infrastructures or an enterprise data center
[10]. However, Unlike Cloud computing, Edge computing
takes advantage of distributed models for the distribution
of servers as compared to Cloud computing that uses a
centralized model [11]. Moreover, Cloud computing faces
higher jitters due to the signiﬁcantly high distance between
User Equipment (UE) and the Cloud server that induces high
latency in Cloud computing as compared to Edge computing
[12]. Besides, due to the long distance between the end-user
and the server, the probability of data end-route attacks is
higher with Cloud computing than Edge computing [13].
The ﬁfth-generation (5G) networks [14] have been making
a revolution into the world of science and technology. The 5G
with speeds of up to 100 gigabits per second promises more
mobile data speeds that are set to be 200 times faster than
4G LTE-Advanced. The 5G is the main guide for the growth
of IoT applications by connecting billions of intelligent things
to make the actual massive IoT [15] a reality. Based on the
report of the International Data Corporation (IDC) [16], 70%
of companies will be supported by the services of the global
5G by spending $1.2 billion on the connectivity management
solutions. Although 5G encompasses numerous technologies
addressing low latency and reliable communications, it has
three new main features to compare with LTE networks [17].
First, the amount of generated data is massively incomparable
with the previous generation of cellular networks. Second,
it makes reliable communications with ultra-low latency that
satisﬁes the QoS requirement of delay-sensitive applications.
Third, it supports heterogeneous environments to allow the
interoperability of a diverse range of devices with differ-
ent communication technologies. Besides, 5G networks sup-
port programmable and reconﬁgurable deployments of core
network functions through Network Function Virtualization
(NFV) [18] and Software-Deﬁned Networks (SDN) [19]. Edge
computing assists 5G networks for having a successful deploy-
ment in order to provide a large amount of broadband, low
transmission latency, and a huge amount of communication
connections simultaneously [20].
To develop a solution for ultra-low latency applications,
the authors believe that it is required to have an adapted
architectural model for Edge Computing in 5G. This architec-
ture should take advantage of suitable technologies to address
the challenges of delay-sensitive applications. Besides, the
proposed architecture model needs to demonstrate its capabil-
ities before implementation. Moreover, to fulﬁll the proposed
solution, it is required to consider a proper way for imple-
mentation. This paper aims to develop a solution for Edge
Computing in 5G and beyond considering the requirements of
delay-sensitive application. The proposed hybrid architecture
has major features such as scalability and reliability.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II,
we ﬁrst review Edge computing and its deployment models as
the state of the art. In Section III, Edge Computing in 5G and
beyond is profoundly investigated. Besides, we characterize
the requirements of the ultra-low latency use cases of Edge
Computing in 5G. In section IV, we employ the characteristics
of the requirements discussed in Section III and propose a
hybrid architecture for edge computing in 5G and beyond.
In Section V, we perform an agent-based simulation on three
models to demonstrate that
the proposed architecture has
less latency compared to the other deployment models. In
Section VI, We discuss the comparison between the proposed
architecture and similar hybrid design architectures for Edge
Computing. Finally, we review open issues of the proposed
hybrid architecture and conclude the paper in Section VII.
I I . L I T ERATUR E R EV I EW
Edge computing is a distributed data processing system
consisting of numerous heterogeneous devices that commu-
nicate with the network in order to perform computing tasks
[21]. Despite the Cloud Computing, Edge Computing places
computation capabilities and the storage closer to endpoint
devices to improve the capability of services and to reduce the
latency of delay-sensitive applications [22]. Edge Computing
is the most solid solution for many companies to decentralize
or ofﬂoad workloads to closer devices in order to bring
various features to their services [23]. In the following, before
reviewing the deployment models of edge computing, we
investigate its beneﬁts, challenges, and requirements.
A. Beneﬁts, Challenges, and Requirements of Edge Computing
The most important beneﬁts of Edge Computing are as
follows [17]:
• Ultra-Low Latency- The notable beneﬁt of edge com-
puting is the capacity to improve the performance of the
system by reducing latency due to localization of data
analyzing procedure, instead of transferring the collected
information to far destinations under the traditional cloud
computing architecture.
• Scalability- Although Edge Computing possesses limited
resource and computing power as compared to the public
cloud infrastructures, the building dedicated Edge Cloud
is still rising due to the possibility of expanding comput-
ing capabilities ﬂexibly of organizations at a low cost.
• Reliability- The operation of a system depends on the
managing of processing functions. In the case a system
is provided with Edge Computing, the possibilities of the
network impaction are negligible due to the closeness of
Edge Cloud to the end-users.
• Success Rate- The probability of service shutdown is so
rare in a system with a number of edge Clouds because
Edge Computing offers unparalleled reliability by routing
the data using multiple paths.
• Security and Privacy- The distribution of storage and
processing carried across a wide range of Edge Clouds
and End-Users provides a high level of security from
vulnerable attacks. Besides, privacy issues are considered
by Edge Computing due to storing and processing the
generated data from IoT devices within nodes in the edge
network.
Besides technical advantages, there are numerous ﬁnancial
efﬁciency and cost reduction with Edge Computing. For in-
stance, there is no need to send large ﬁles to a cloud server
where you would have to pay for storing them. According
to Grand View Research [24], the global value of the edge
computing market
in 2019 is $43.4 billion. It has been
estimated that the global size of the edge computing market
will explode with an annual growth rate of 37.4 percent
by 2027. Moreover, McKinsey&Company has shown edge
computing has a potential value of $175 billion to $215 billion
in hardware by 2025 [25]. This shows the importance of Edge
Computing, especially for businesses to have better visibility
into the operations of their business and better serve their
customers.
Edge computing is renovating the way data is being handled
through systems. Edge Computing, in order to promise faster
processing right at the source of the data, can take advantage of
several technologies such as Network Function Virtualization
(NFV) plus Software-Deﬁned Networking (SDN). In-depth, it
is required to recognize the characteristics of Edge Computing
alongside with its enabling requirements in order to study its
deployment models. Edge computing has ﬁve main character-
istics as follows [26]:
• Low latency and proximity: The availability of the
computational resources in the local proximity reduces
the response delay time experienced by devices as com-
pared to reaching the traditional cloud. Also, it allows
users to leverage the network information in order to
make ofﬂoading decisions. Moreover, the service provider
can leverage the information of users by extracting and
analyzing device information and the user’s behavior to
improve their services.
• The Dense Geographical Distribution: it improves the
accuracy of the system by facilitating location-based
mobility services with real-time analytics to the network
administrators without traversing the entire WAN.
• Location awareness: As the number of devices is rapidly
increasing, Edge computing supports mobility, such as the
Locator ID Separation Protocol (LISP), to communicate
directly with devices. Edge computing is location-aware
and highly supports mobility by enabling edge servers
to collect and analyze the generated data based on the
geographical location of UEs.
• Context awareness: Context-awareness is deﬁned inter-
dependently to location awareness and is a characteristic
of mobile devices that enables edge servers to collect
network context information. Edge computing takes of-
ﬂoading decisions and accesses the Edge services based
on the context information of the mobile device.
• Heterogeneity: The network heterogeneity refers to the
diversity of communication technologies that affect the
performance of Edge services. The successful deploy-
ment of Edge computing handles interoperability issues
and covers varied platforms, architectures, infrastructures,
computing, and communication technologies used by the
Edge computing elements such as End-Devices, Edge-
Servers, and Networks.
Considering the characteristics of Edge Computing, there
are ﬁve major enabling requirements for Edge computing that
are classiﬁed as follows. 1) Real-time Interaction: Realtime
interaction enables the use of edge computing over cloud
computing to improve QoS and to support ultra-low latency
applications such as 3D Gaming that demands a very high
speed of data communication. 2) Local processing: it creates
an opportunity for more capacity of processing data and
requests by high speed communication between edge servers.
3) High data rate: it transmits the massive amount of data
generated to edge clouds. 4) Dynamic Billing Mechanism:
it refers to the ability of a service provider to manage its
variables when an end-user is facilitated through their roaming
Edge services. This mechanism depends on various network
parameters such as bandwidth and latency to respond to several
end-users who may request speciﬁc resources from the cloud
through the Edge Cloud. 5) high availability: it ensures the
availability of the cloud services at the edge.
B. Deployment models of Edge Computing
In this section, we investigate three important deployment
models of Edge Computing: Fog Computing, Cloudlet, and
Multi-access Edge Computing (MEC) [6] [7] [8].
1) Fog Computing: Fog computing [27] has been intro-
duced by Cisco in 2012. This model enables applications to
run directly at the edge of the network through billions of
smart connected devices. Fog computing is a cooperation-
based edge cloud, wherein heterogeneous end-users share
their resources in order to deliver services and applications.
The OpenFog Consortium [28], which has been founded by
ARM, Cisco, Dell, Intel, Microsoft, and Princeton University
in November 2015, deﬁnes fog computing as a system-level
horizontal architecture that distributes resources and services
of computing, storage, control, and networking anywhere from
the cloud to end-users. In the architecture of Fog Computing
various tools have been provided to distribute and manage re-
sources and services along with end users and across networks.
However, servers, applications, and small clouds are placed
at the edge in other architectures. The difference between
Edge Cloud and Fog is that Fog interacts with industrial
gateways and embedded computer systems on a local area
network, with various operations depending on the cloud,
whereas edge performs on embedded computing platforms
directly interfacing to sensors and controllers.
2) Cloudlets: The cloudlets [29] or a data center in a box is
a small-scale cloud Data Center (DC) that is located at the edge
of the internet and offers a bunch of resources and services for
computing, storage, control, and wireless LAN connectivity
towards the edge. Cloudlets solve the latency problem and the
end-to-end response time between end-users and associated
Cloud by using the computer resources available in the local
network. A cloudlets is a cluster of secure computers with high
performance and capability of computing that are connected
to the internet and ready to use by nearby end-users. The
main idea of the cloudlets lies behind supporting resource-
intensive and interactive applications by providing powerful
computing resources to end-users with lower latency. Cloudlets
represent the middle layer of the 3-level hierarchy architecture
[29], mobile device layer, cloudlets layer, and cloud layer,
to attain lower response time. In the Cloudlets architecture,
User Equipments (UEs) have access to resources of cloudlets
through a one-hop high-speed wireless LAN.
3) Multi-access Edge Computing (MEC): The concept of
Mobile Edge Computing [30], which has been supported
by Huawei, IBM, Intel, Nokia Networks, NTT DoCoMo,
Vodafone, and other more companies, has been introduced by
European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI) [31]
in September 2014. In this Model, mobile users can utilize
computing services from the base station. In the MEC World
Congress 2016, MEC ISG has renamed mobile edge com-
puting as multi-access edge computing in order to reﬂect the
growing interests of non-cellular operators. MEC applications
are running as VM on top of the virtualization infrastructure
and can interact with the mobile edge platform to perform
certain support procedures related to the life-cycle of the
application.
To compare these three models, we should indicate that the
Cloudlet and the Multi-access Edge Computing are designed
to provide the services to end-users with the local resources.
However, Fog especially relies on the hardware that possesses
computational capabilities along with the normal functionality
of the device such as router and switches. Telecommunication
operators typically use MEC that is recognized as a key model
that satisﬁes 5G requirements [32], while Cloudlets and Fog
are independent of operators and are typically hosted by B2B
clients. Each implementation model has its characteristics that
are proper for precise use cases. As shown in table I, we
compare the deployment models of Edge Computing with each
other considering the characteristics (e.g. Context-Awareness)
and requirements (e.g Real-time Interaction and Security) of
the deployment models. We can conclude from the table that
MEC and Cloudlet are more suitable for use cases that require
more resources for computation. However, Fog Computing is
better for cases that need fewer resources and lower latency.
I I I . EDG E COM PU T ING IN 5G AND B EYOND
5G has been appreciated as the most important wireless
cellular network that is expected to satisfy the requirements
of next-generation networks [33]. There are three main charac-
teristics in 5G networks that are not observed in the previous
generations [34] [17]. As the ﬁrst characteristic, 5G networks
generate a massive amount of data. Secondly, although 4G
impose QoS requirements, 5G networks provide more QoS
granularity to support delay-sensitive, interactive and ultra-
low latency applications. Third, 5G networks support hetero-
geneous environments by empowering the interoperability of
a diverse range of networks and communication protocols. All
these original characteristics of 5G are the result of three main
brand-new technologies that provide higher capacities to net-
works [17]. The First is mmWave communication, which uses
high-frequency bands like 30 GHz to 300 GHz to provide high
bandwidth at a minimum of 11 Gbps. Second, the deployment
of small-cells that enables devices to communicate through
mmWave to decrease interference and transmission range.
Finally, the massive multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO)
that empowers base stations (BSs) in order to use a consider-
able number of antennas to enable beamforming and reduce
interference by supporting parallel communication.
A. Components of 5G and Beyond
5G networks consist of four components: 5G Radio Access
Network (RAN), 5G Core Network (CN), 5G Transport Net-
work, and 5G Interconnect Network. 5G has split the Evolved
Packet Gateway (EPG) of 4G, the Ericsson’s implementation
of the 3GPP S-/P-GW, into User Plane Function (UPF) and
Session Management Function (SMF) as a data plane function
and a control plane function, respectively. The UPF handles
the critical data plane and the packet processing between
RAN and the data network such as the Internet [35]. 5G
Radio Access Technology (RAT) is the underlying physical
connection method for the 5G communication network. 5G
Multiple Radio Access Technology (Multi-RAT) RAN [36] is
an access network that consists of various cellular networks
and communication protocols such as Bluetooth, Wi-Fi, etc.
5G gNB is a node of 5G RAN connected to the 5G CN. 5G
gNB [37] is the next generation NodeB that is a radio base
station similar to what was called NodeB in 3G-UMTS and
eNodeB or eNB in 4G-LTE. 5G gNB architecture is split into
Central Unit (CU) and Distributed Unit (DU), which are the
control plane and data plane of the 5G RAN, respectively. 5G
CU is a logical node that controls the gNB functions such
as Session Management, Transfering the user data, Mobility
control, and sharing RAN. 5G CU can be hosted in a regional
cloud data center or collocated with a 5G DU. 5G DU is a
logical node that operates based on the option of a lower-layer
split (LLS). The operation of 5G DU is controlled by 5G CU
and it is hosted in an Edge cloud data center connected to
the radio via a packet interface known as enhanced Common
Public Radio Interface (eCPRI). Besides, 5G CU could be
split into 5G CU Control Plane (5G CU-C) part and 5G
CU User Plane (5G CU-U), and be implemented in different
locations [38]. Researchers around the world have started to
investigate 6G networks as beyond 5G networks that are being
commercialized. 6G is expected to have a profound impact
on the intelligence process of communication developments
to deliver high Quality of Service and energy efﬁciency by
adjusting new architectural changes consisting of intelligent
connectivity, deep connectivity, holographic connectivity, and
ubiquitous connectivity [39]. 5G and beyond empowers Edge
Computing aiming to move the computation away from data
centers towards the edge of the network.
B. Objectives of Edge Computing in 5G and Beyond
There are ﬁve main objectives that edge computing in 5G
and beyond pursues as follows [40].
• Enhancing data management: it improves the capability
of a system to handle a massive amount of data that is
generated by devices.
• Enhancing the Quality-of-Service (QoS): it improves
the QoS in order to support various requirements of
QoS and to improve the Quality-of-Experience (QoE).
Service providers are required to take a holistic view
of their subscribers with contextual
information such
as preferences and interests. Afterward, the personalized
TABLE I
DEPLOYMENT MODELS OF EDGE COMPUT ING
Type of Implementation
Organizations
Real-time Interaction
Computation Power
Power Consumption
Coverage
Server Density
Context-awareness
Fog Computing
ARM, Cisco, Dell, Intel, Microsoft, and Princeton
University founded OpenFog Consortium
High
Medium
Low
Low
Medium
Medium
MEC
AT&T, Huawei, Intel, Vodafone,
etc. supports ETSI MEC
Medium
High
High
High
Low
High
Cloudlets
Vodafone, Intel, Huawei, and Carnegie
Mellon University launched OEC
Medium
High
Medium
Low
High
Low
information could be used in order to enhance their QoE
or for attracting new customers.
• Network demand Estimation: it predicts the required
network resources in order to support the demands of
a network in local proximity and to provide an optimal
allocation of resources to handle the local demands of the
network.
• Dynamic resource allocation: in order to allocate re-
sources of the network such as bandwidth in an efﬁcient
way.
• Location awareness Management: edge servers are
distributed geographically in order to support location-
based services by inducing and tracking the location of
devices.
• Resource Management: it enhances the optimization of
network resource utilization to improve network perfor-
mance.
C. Technologies of Edge Computing in 5G and Beyond
5G and beyond assist the next generation of IoT systems
by satisfying the four key requirements of edge computing
discussed in the previous section with major technologies that
enable edge computing in 5G and beyond. These technologies
are as follows.
• Cognitive Radio and Intelligent Reﬂecting Surfaces
(IRSs): Cognitive Radio [41] allows us to reach the
high spectrum demand and efﬁcient spectrum scarcity
of ultra-low latency applications and services of massive
IoT connections. Besides, Intelligent Reﬂecting Surfaces
(IRSs) [42] increase spectrum and energy efﬁciencies
by tuning to the wireless environments. These two are
promising technologies for 6G wireless communication.
• Network Function Virtualization (NFV): NFV involves
the implementation of network functions as software
modules that can run on general-purpose hardware. NFV
enables edge devices to provide computing services and
operate network functions by creating multiple Virtual
Machines (VMs). By this approach, it is not necessary
to dedicate speciﬁc hardware to run for each network
functions and services.
• Software-Deﬁned Networks (SDN): SDN is a network
architecture that separates a network into control and
data planes to provide ﬂexible and agile networks, which
helps to simplify network management and deploy new
services. In fact, SDN complements NFV by decoupling
the management or control plane from the data plane
over which data packets are forwarded. SDN enables
easier and more ﬂexible management of networks through
abstractions and a logically centralized controller that
handles policy and forwarding decisions.
• Massive Multiple-Input Multiple-Output
(MIMO):
Massive MIMO [43] increases the number of antennas
at the transmitter and the receiver by deploying multiple
antenna elements. This is following the Shannon theorem
in which we can increase the signal-to-noise ratio without
increasing the transmission power, which leads us to
enhanced network capacity and energy efﬁciency. Using
massive MIMO, we can ofﬂoad tasks between edge
servers simultaneously in order to reduce latency and
energy consumption.
• Computation Ofﬂoading: Computation ofﬂoading [23]
[44] is a method that transfers resource-intensive compu-
tations from a device or edge server to the resource-rich
nearby device or edge server. The most important part of
computation ofﬂoading is to decide whether to ofﬂoad or
not, whether full or partial ofﬂoading is applicable, and
what and how the computation could be ofﬂoaded. The
ofﬂoading decision depends on the application model.
Based on various techniques and algorithms, the decision
engine determines whether to ofﬂoad or not. The majority
of algorithms aim to minimize the energy consumption
at
the mobile device, subject
to the execution delay
acceptable by the ofﬂoaded application, or to ﬁnd an
optimal tradeoff between these two metrics.
• 5G NR (New Radio): 5G NR [45] is a new Radio Access
Technology (RAT) developed by 3GPP that provides a
connection to a diverse range of devices to achieve low
latency and scalable networks.
• Device-to-Device (D2D) communication: D2D com-
munication [46] allows direct communication between
neighboring devices using ad-hoc links without passing
through base stations. D2D communication improves
energy efﬁciency and spectrum utilization of the system.
Moreover, devices can ofﬂoad tasks and computations
to edge servers using D2D communication in order to
improve the computational capabilities of UEs. Besides,
D2D guarantees better QoS for service provisioning by
supporting a large number of information interactions and
providing a higher transmission data rate.
• Cross-Layer Communication: To enable the commu-
nication between different networks, we use network
gateways, which are computer systems or devices that
act as a conversion and translate various communication
protocols, data formats, and network architectures. The
communication between different devices with different
communication protocols and data structures in a network
gateway is deﬁned as Cross-Layer Communication. This
solution does not impose any modiﬁcations on the hard-
ware of devices, and the whole design is transparent to
the upper-level wireless communication systems [47].
D. Use cases of Edge Computing in 5G and Beyond
To develop a solution for Edge Computing in 5G, we
ﬁrst need to recognize the requirements of ultra-low latency
applications. In this regard, it is necessary to study applications
of 5G Edge Computing to identify and classify their require-
ments. Various use cases are relying on 5G edge computing
due to its capabilities on real-time interaction, local processing,
high data rate, and high availability [48]. The most important
use cases of 5G Edge Computing are as follows.
• Remote Surgery: The remote diagnostics and the remote
surgery, as well as monitoring of patient vital signs,
are of the most signiﬁcant use cases of Health Care
applications in 5G Edge Computing. These kinds of ap-
plications require an ultra-low latency with the accuracy
of nanoseconds to react in real time during a surgery.
Besides,
these use cases demand trustworthy privacy
as they carry the vital health information of a person.
Further, it requires secure communication between Cloud
Edge for processing data because if a wrong data gets
injected into the system during surgery, it could bring a
total disaster.
• 3D Gaming: 3D Gaming, alongside multimedia services
such as streaming HDTV or 3D TV, is the most signiﬁ-
cant use case of Entertainment applications in 5G Edge
Computing. These use cases demand trustworthy privacy
and security, and wide bandwidth to get updated in real-
time with the nanosecond latency.
• Virtual Reality (VR) and Augmented Reality (AR):
AR and VR use cases, such as streaming video contents
on the virtual reality glasses, are the most viral use cases
of Edge Computing that require large-scale bandwidth,
ultra-low latency, and trustworthy security and privacy.
• Smart Factory: Future factories are equipped with smart
machines to improve safety and productivity. These fac-
tories require a scalable structure that has a very low la-
tency for processing data during the industrial processes.
Besides, the privacy and security of these factories are of
the most vital requirements in Industry 4.0.
• Autonomous Vehicles: Autonomous Vehicles alongside
with Internet of Vehicles (IoV), whereby drivers can
collect
information from trafﬁc and process them in
a real-time manner to avoid accidents or design new
services, are the most signiﬁcant use cases of the next
generation transportation applications. These use cases
require a scalable, trustworthy, and secure structure that
is aware of its location.
E. Deployment Model for Edge Computing Use Cases in 5G
In Table II, we investigate the role of the characteristics
and requirements discussed in the previous section for use
cases of Edge Computing in 5G and Beyond. There are
seven factors [49] such as Bandwidth, Ultra-Low Latency, and
etc. that have been explored based on their necessity from
crucial to important and incidental. For Instance, Location
awareness is crucial for Autonomous Vehicles while it is only
important for Remote Surgery. Furthermore, we determine
the relationship between the mentioned requirements and the
implementation features of the Edge Computing deployment
models. As shown in Table III, this relationship links the
characteristics of Edge Computing Use Cases in 5G (e. g.
Bandwidth, Scalability, etc.) and fundamental features of its
deployments model (Coverage, Real-Time Interaction, etc.).
For instance, Scalability is highly related to coverage while it
is less related to Real-Time Interaction. Table III can guide
us to develop the most suitable solutions for the mentioned
ultra-low latency use cases of Edge Computing in 5G and
Beyond. In this section, we characterized the use cases of 5G
Edge Computing in Table II and determined the relationship
between the mentioned characteristics and the implementa-
tion features of the Edge Computing deployment models in
Table III. Moreover, in the previous section, we discussed
the requirements and characteristics of deployment models in
Edge Computing and compared its deployment models with
each other considering those characteristics and requirements
in Table I. Now, there is a link between deployment models
of Edge Computing and the ultra-low latency use cases of 5G
Edge Computing using the tables and information above. In
the next section, we will propose an architecture that fulﬁlls
the requirements of Edge Computing use cases in 5G and
Beyond.
IV. TH E PRO PO SED HYBR ID ARCH I T EC TUR E
In this section, we are going to ﬁnd the relationship between
the deployment models of Edge Computing and the use cases
of Edge Computing in 5G and Beyond. Using this relationship,
we will propose a scalable architecture that fulﬁlls the require-
ments of Edge Computing in 5G and Beyond. As we discussed
in the previous section and Table III, every use case has its
own particular requirements and characteristics. Also in Table
I, we discussed the characteristics of the deployment models
of Edge Computing. Using Table I and Table III, we can link
the deployment models of Edge Computing to the use cases
of 5G Edge Computing. For Instance, according to Table II
and Table III, the requirements of Smart Factories are real-time
interaction, to support extensible coverage, and scalability. Us-
ing Table I, we can ﬁnd out that the Fog Computing paradigm
is able to respond properly to the requirements of real-time
TH E REQU IR EM EN T S O F EDGE COM PU T ING U S E CA S E S IN 5G AND B EYOND
TABLE II
Requirements/Applications
Bandwidth
Ultra-Low Latency
Extensibility
Context/Location Awareness
Power Consumption
Scalability
Privacy and Security
Autonomous Vehicles
important
crucial
important
crucial
crucial
important
crucial
Smart Factory
important
crucial
incidental
important
crucial
important
crucial
AR/VR
crucial
crucial
important
important
crucial
important
crucial
3D Gaming
crucial
crucial
important
important
crucial
important
important
Remote Surgery
important
crucial
incidental
incidental
crucial
important
crucial
TH E REQU IR EM EN T S O F EDGE COM PUT ING U S E CA S E S IN 5G AND TH E FEATURE S O F TH E EDG E COM PUT ING DE PLOYM EN T MOD EL S
TABLE III
Requirements/Deployment Features
Bandwidth
Ultra-Low Latency
Extensibility
Context/Location Awareness
Power Consumption
Scalability
Privacy and Security
Coverage
Highly Related
Highly Related
Mostly Related
Mostly Related
Highly Related
Highly Related
Mostly Related
Computational Capability
Mostly Related
Mostly Related
Highly Related
Mostly Related
Highly Related
Mostly Related
Less Related
Real-time Interaction
Highly Related
Highly Related
Mostly Related
Highly Related
Mostly Related
Less Related
Mostly Related
Proximity
Highly Related
Highly Related
Highly Related
Less Related
Mostly Related
Mostly Related
Highly Related
interaction. However, in order to support extensible coverage
with scalability, MEC can perform much more productively.
In such a situation, the authors propose to use the integration
of Fog Computing with MEC that can take advantage of
low-layer processing paradigms such as performing Cross-
Layer Communication (CLC) in Gateways in order to fulﬁll
all requirements of Smart Factories. We use logic above and
ﬁnd suitable deployment models for the use cases of 5G Edge
Computing listed in Table IV.
TH E SU I TABL E MOD EL S FOR TH E U SE CA SE S O F 5G EDGE COM PU T ING
TABLE IV
Use Case
Autonomous Vehicles
Smart Factory
AR/VR
3D Gaming
Remote Surgery
Suitable Implementation Model
Fog Computing + MEC + D2D
Fog Computing + MEC + CLC
MEC/Cloudlets+ Fog Computing
MEC + Cloudlets
Fog Computing/Cloudlets + MEC
Using Table IV, we can conclude that the most suitable
solution that covers uses cases of 5G Edge Computing that
fulﬁll their requirements is the hybrid solution that supports
the data pre-processing using CLC and D2D communication
to enable collaborative computing that performs tasks in more
than single computing platforms or paradigms. In this paper,
the term ”Hybrid Architecture” points out to an architecture
that
is integrated with MEC and Fog, and Cloudlets. As
shown in Fig 1, we are going to propose a hybrid architecture
consisting of two layers before the core network that are
Terminal Layer and Network Access Layer. As the deployment
of the proposed architecture has been shown in Fig 2, the
proposed architecture is heterogeneous, scalable, and supports
the requirements of 5G Edge Computing use cases.
A. Terminal Layer
The Terminal layer consists of UEs and gateways. In this
layer, customers/UEs get connected to the 5G network directly
by 5G transmitters or through a gateway. The role of this
layer is to act as an Edge Platform as a Service (E-PaaS)
[50] in order to achieve two objectives: The First is to take
advantage of the capability of our customers hardware to
preprocess the information and to perform uncomplicated
analysis. The second is to use 5G in order to enable D2D
communication between UEs. Not so long, vehicles will be
autonomous and drive by themselves. Therefore, it is required
to connect vehicles through a very low latency technology
that can communicate in less than one microsecond. D2D
Communication is a technology, which plays an important
role in Connected-Vehicles. In this regard, we can consider
D2D communication in the deployment of our platform. By
exchanging and sharing the data between UEs through D2D
communication, we can have access to more data for pro-
cessing and also creating innovative services. Furthermore, the
E-PaaS should be able to use other common communication
protocols [51] such as Bluetooth for D2D communication
between UEs in case one of them is not equipped with 5G. In
this way, the E-PaaS can form an ad-hoc network that consists
of various communication protocols. For instance, Google has
designed Cloud IoT Edge, which is a software stack that runs
on Android and Linux OS to extend AI and Data Analysis
on the very low-level Edge [52]. Another important aspect
of the E-PaaS platform is that it should be able to perform
on gateways for utilizing Cross-layer Communication (CLC).
Up to now, the common communication protocol of most IoT
systems has been based on Wi-Fi, Bluetooth LP, ZigBee, and,
recently, LPWANs such as Lora and Sigfox. To adapt 5G with
this generation of IoT facilities, researchers have proposed
Gateways to collect data of these systems, store and send them
to a 5G gNBs, or directly to an individual UPF integrated
with 5G CU-C. In such a situation, we propose to use Cross-
Layer Communication (CLC) within these Gateways due to
the enormous valuable information and services that could be
retrieved from collecting and analyzing data through CLC in
gateways.
B. Network Access Layer
As discussed earlier, we propose to use a hybrid structure
for edge computing that consists of two components toward a
dynamic ultra-fast arrangement that is a combination of MEC,
Fog, and Cloudlet. The ﬁrst component is located on base
stations and could be MEC, Fog, or Cloudlets considering the
type of UE’s communication protocol. In this regard, we have
considered that the deployment of the proposed architecture is
equipped with 5G Multi-RAT networks that combine several
Radio Access Technologies to deliver the service to UEs. In
this section, we classify the base stations into 3 categories:
1) 5G gNB 2) Wireless Access Point 3) IoT-Oriented Base
Stations. For Wi-Fi-based BS such as Wireless Access Points,
we propose to use Cloudlets as the deployment model of
Edge Computing due to its characteristics that offer services
for wireless LAN connectivity and cover the requirements
of ultra-low applications such as VR/AR that are sensitive
to delay and require to use real-time interactions. For IoT-
Oriented protocols such as Lora and Sigfox, we suggest
continuing using Fog Computing that is currently the most
common deployment model for their use cases due to the
high capability of processing information and the ability to
run Cloud applications on the edge level. For 5G networks,
as discussed in Section III, in the architecture of 5G gNB,
5G CU consists of 5G CU-CP and 5G CU-UP. In this Layer,
the generated data from Terminal Layer will be provided
to 5G gNB through the 5G Radio Unit (RU) and 5G gNB
process the data by the MEC called U-MEC and is equipped
with 5G CU-UP. The U-MEC is a type of MEC that has as
Fig. 1. The Proposed Hybrid Architecture for 5G Edge Computing
high computation power as Fog Computing and also various
tools to provide services along with UEs and across the
network. In the proposition of U-MEC, we are mainly focused
on the speed and capacity of data processing, whereas the
second component is focused on distributing and managing
the resources.
The second component is the core of the proposed 5G Edge
Computing architecture that is located in a UPF integrated
with 5G CU-CP and MEC Hosts called C-MEC. C-MEC
is a type of MEC that is responsible to manage resources
and data processing of the network. C-MEC is suitable for
the core SDN and NFV due to its signiﬁcant coverage sup-
port, context-awareness support, and high server density. For
the second component, we propose to use the MEC that
is designed by the European Telecommunication Standard
Institute. ETSI has standardized 5G architecture for plenty
of telecommunication companies such as Vodafone and has
considered various technologies NFV and SDN in its structure.
ETSI has provided his architecture deployment in the Network
Functionality Virtualization (NFV) environment, which allows
MEC applications to run as a VM on top of the virtualization
infrastructures. Besides, ETSI has designed an architecture for
the SDN model that is responsible to control the network by
Switches/Routers that are distributed in order to modify the
network for computation ofﬂoading and resource allocation
through Software Deﬁned Networks (SDN) technology.
The proposed hybrid architecture satisﬁes the requirements
of 5G Edge Computing use cases and fulﬁlls the demands of
5G-IoT services. The hybrid architecture is developed based
on the novel
technologies, which empower the 5G Edge
Computing paradigm that is more sustainable and scalable than
existing architectures and has main features such as scalability,
heterogeneousness, and ability to respond to the high volume
of demands. There are numerous criteria to evaluate the
proposed hybrid architecture and demonstrate its efﬁciency.
In the next section, we will simulate the proposed architecture
and will consider the latency as a signiﬁcant criteria for the
demonstration.
V. S IMU LAT ION AND ANA LY S I S
In order to demonstrate the efﬁciency of the proposed
architecture, we have simulated the proposed architecture and
considered the latency as vital criteria due to the requirements
of delay-sensitive applications discussed in previous sections.
Considering the time characteristics of information, there are
three main categories for data [17]. The ﬁrst type is hard real-
time data that has a strict predeﬁned latency. The second is
soft real-time data that can tolerate predeﬁned and bounded
latency. The last is non-real-time data that is not time-sensitive
and can tolerate latency. In this simulation, we have considered
that all the data are hard real-time and cannot tolerate latency
to meet the simulation with practical application.
In this regard, we have applied agent-based simulation [53]
[54] to the proposed architecture and have modeled it as a
Multi-Agent System (MAS) [55]. A multi-agent system is a
Fig. 2. The Deployment Model of The Proposed Architecture
distributed system composed of multiple interacting intelli-
gent agents. Agent-based modeling is a powerful simulation
technique, which has a collection of autonomous decision-
making entities called agents that are organized in an artiﬁcial
environment [56]. The main reason that we have used agent-
based simulation for Edge Computing is that Edge Com-
puting has a distributed architecture, and agent-simulation
is a suitable solution for the modeling and execution of
the distributed components of the architecture where every
component individually makes decisions based on a set of rules
and the local state of the system.
As shown in Fig 3, we have performed three agent-based
simulations on three deployment models: 1) Fog Computing
2) 5G MEC 3) the proposed hybrid architecture. The strategy
is to compare the latency of three simulations with each other.
In this regard, we ﬁrst have compared the latency of the Fog
Computing and latency of the 5G MEC to show how 5G
impacts on the latency and decreases it up to 50 times. Next,
we have compared the latency of the 5G MEC and the latency
of the proposed hybrid architecture to demonstrate the beneﬁts
of the proposed architecture. The simulation consists of nine
types of agents: UE, Base Station (BS), 5G gNB, 5G CU-CP,
5G CU-UP, Fog, Edge Cloud, C-MEC, U-MEC, and Cloud.
In this regard, we have used the osBrain [57] environment,
which is a Python-based multi-agent system framework that
allows us to have efﬁcient and asynchronous communication
with various communication patterns such as request-reply,
push-pull, and publish-subscribe.
In the ﬁrst model, we simulate a simple Fog Computing
consisting of four types of agents: UE, BS, Fog, and Cloud as
shown in Fig 3(a). The UE continuously sends data to BS that
is responsible to distribute the generated data between Fog or
Cloud for computation. In this simulation, the latency has been
measured based on the time between sending the raw data and
receiving the processed information. As shown in (1), Latency
is deﬁned as Ttotal , which is calculated through the sum of
the Transmission Time TT and Processing Time TP in Fog
and Cloud. The Transmission Time is equal to the sum of the
time that data is sent and received from UE to BS, a part of
it from BS to Fog, and the rest of it from BS to Cloud in the
case that the volume of data is high or the time we reserve the
Fog for more sensitive application. The time that data is sent
from UE to BS is deﬁned TU E = αVData
, in which VData is
the amount of data, α is the motion effect of UE considered
as a randomized ratio between 0.7 and 1 in the speed rate, and
SU E is the speed of UE in sending the data to BS that supports
4G LTE-Advanced with the speed rate of 37 megabytes per
second and is connected to the Fog and Cloud through the
SU E
Fig. 3. The Paradigms of the Simulated Architectures
SBS
internet. The distance between UE-to-BS and BS-to-fog is set
to a single hop, which impacts the latency considering the ideal
situation for the communication part. The time that a part of
data is sent from BS to Fog is deﬁned TF og = VF og
, in which
VF og is the amount of data sent to Fog and SBS is the speed
of BS in sending the data to Fog. The time that the rest of data
is sent from BS to Cloud is deﬁned TC loud = ln H ∗ VC loud
,
in which VC loud is the amount of data sent to Cloud, SBS
is the speed of BS in sending the data to Cloud, and ln H
is the nonlinear effect of H number of hops between BS and
Cloud, which is considered equal to 10 hops, due to the power
loss and the capacity of the communication channels. On the
other hand, Processing Time is equal to the time that data is
processed by Fog and Cloud. The Processing Time is deﬁned
SBS
TP = VF og
CF og
+ VC loud
CC loud
in which VF og , CF og , VC loud , CC loud are
respectively the amount of data in Fog, the computation power
of Fog, the amount of data in Cloud, and the computation
power of Cloud. As discussed in Section II, the computation
power of Fog is limited. Therefore, after a certain amount of
data, the BS will send the data directly to the Cloud. In this
simulation, we have considered the computation power of the
Fog as 1GB/cycle, which means it can compute the 1GB of
data per cycle. Finally, using the above equations, we deﬁne
Total Latency as Ttotal equal to the summation of the Latency
for every UEs from 1 to N considering the Processing Time
and the double of Transmission Time caused by sending data
and receiving the processed information.
N(cid:88)
Ttotal =
T i
T + T i
P
T i
T = 2(
Data
αV i
S i
U E
i=1
+
V i
F og
SBS
+ ln H ∗ V i
C loud
SBS
)
(1)
T i
P =
V i
F og
CF og
+
V i
C loud
CC loud
, V i
Data = V i
F og + V i
C loud
In the second model, we simulate a simple 5G MEC
consisting of four types of agents: UE, 5G gNB, MEC, and
Cloud as shown in Fig 3 (b). The UE continuously sends data
to 5G gNB that is responsible to insert the generated data
in MEC or send it to Cloud for more detailed computation.
Same as the ﬁrst simulation, in this simulation we measure the
latency, which is the time between sending the raw data and
receiving the information. As shown in (2), the Transmission
Time of this simulation is equal to the sum of the time that
data is sent and received from UE to 5G gNB, MEC, and
Cloud. The ratio speed of 5G or S5GgN B has been estimated
800 megabytes per second and the motion effect of the UE or
α is deﬁned as a factor between 0.8 and 1 that multiplies in
the speed rate. The same as the previous model, the distance
between UE-to-5G gNB and 5G gNB-to-MEC is set to a
single hop, which has a linear effect on the latency considering
the improvement of 5G to compare with 4G LTE. Also, the
distance between 5G gNB and Cloud is considered equal to
10 hops. This distance slightly affects the latency due to the
power loss and the capacity of the 5G communication channel.
However, it is still possible to reduce the latency of 5G MEC as
compared with the proposed hybrid model. On the other hand,
Processing Time is equal to the time that data is processed
by MEC and Cloud. Moreover, as shown in Section II, the
computation power of MEC is superior to Fog and it has been
considered equal to 2GB/cycle in this simulation.
T i
T = 2(
Data
αV i
S i
U E
+
V i
M EC
S5GgN B
+ ln H ∗ V i
C loud
S5GgN B
)
(2)
T i
P =
V i
M EC
CM EC
+
V i
C loud
CC loud
, V i
Data = V i
M EC + V i
C loud
In the last simulation, we have simulated the proposed hybrid
architecture that consists of 6 types of agents: UE, 5G CU-CP,
5G CU-UP, C-MEC, U-MEC, and Cloud as shown in Fig 3(c).
The strategy is that the UE continuously sends data to 5G CU-
UP that is responsible to insert the data in U-MEC or to send it
Fig. 4. Comparison Between Latencies of the Simulated Architectures
to the 5G CU-CP for processing the rest of the data in C-MEC
or either send it to Cloud for more detailed computation. Same
as the ﬁrst and the second simulation, we measure the time
between sending the raw data and receiving the information as
latency in this simulation. The communication system between
UEs and other components is based on 5G and its speed rate
is deﬁned 800 megabytes per second. The motion of the UE
is deﬁned as a factor between 0.9 and 1 that multiplies in
the speed rate. The same as the previous model, the distance
between UE-to-5G-CU-UP and 5G-CU-to-MEC is set to a
single hop, which has a linear effect on the latency considering
the improvement of 5G to compare with 4G LTE. Same as 5G
MEC, the distance between the 5G CU-CP and the Cloud is
considered equal to 10 hops, which has a nonlinear effect on
the latency considering the power loss and the capacity of the
communication channel as well. The computation power of
U-MEC and C-MEC is considered 2GB/Cycle and 1GB/Cycle
respectively.
T
T i
2
=
αV i
S i
Data
U E
+
V i
U −M EC
S5G−CU −U
+
V i
C−M EC
S5G−CU −C
+ ln H ∗ V i
C loud
S5G−CU
V i
V i
T i
P =
U −M EC
C−M EC
C loud
CU −M EC
CC−M EC
CC loud
Data = V i
U −M EC + V i
C−M EC + V i
C loud
V i
+
V i
+
(3)
As shown in Fig 4, we have run the multi-agent systems and
fed them by 50 MB data to 2.5 GB of input with a ratio
of 50MB. The latency of the Fog Computing paradigm is
not comparable to the latency of 5G MEC as shown in Fig
4(A). The main reason for this discrepancy is that the speed
rate of 5G is 200 times more than 4G LTE-Advanced. We
also have simulated the proposed hybrid model and compare
its latency with the latency of 5G MEC. As shown in Fig
4(B),
the proposed model reduces latency up to 11% in
comparison with the latency of 5G MEC. The main reason for
the difference is that there are more available resources close
to the UEs. Moreover, the network has been customized by
SDN controllers to ofﬂoad the resources distributed in certain
areas.
In this section, we have performed an agent-based sim-
ulation and compared the result with the Fog Computing
paradigm and 5G MEC paradigm. We demonstrated that the
proposed architecture has less latency comparing 5G MEC.
Finally, we have discussed the result to prove and show the
contribution of our paper. Besides the latency, there are other
performance measurements such as operation cost, QoS, and
energy efﬁciency that have to be compared with 5G MEC
in the implementation phase. In the next section, we will
discuss an open-source project
in order to implement
the
model practically with available tools and also about the open
issues that need to be considered and investigated.
V I . D I SCU S S ION
So far, we have proposed an architecture for 5G Edge
Computing in order to design a solution that satisﬁes the
requirements of the delay-sensitive applications. In this sec-
tion, we are going to compare the proposed architecture
with similar hybrid design architectures for Edge Computing.
Afterward, we will discuss about the open issues that need to
be considered in the proposed architecture. These issues can
provide direction to researchers for further research in this
area.
A. Comparison
There are various traditional designed hybrid architectures
for Edge Computing. Most of these architectures have not
considered the requirements of ultra-low latency applications
and the next-generation technologies that can satisfy them.
In Table V, we have compared these architectures with each
other based on the criteria we introduced as the beneﬁts of
Edge Computing in Section II. For instance, although Li et
al. [58] proposed a four-layer hybrid computing framework
to fulﬁll the real-time requirements of smart manufacturing
with edge computing support, they didn’t consider the struc-
ture of standardized deployment of edge computing, such as
MEC or Cloudlets. Also, their research is based on current
technologies. For instance, they didn’t investigate the next-
generation networks such as 5G or beyond the 5G. In [59], A.
COM PAR I SON B ETW E EN HYBR ID ARCH I T EC TUR E S FOR EDGE COM PU T ING
TABLE V
Hybrid Architectures
Li et al. [58]
A. Reiter et al. [59]
L. Pu et al. [60]
The Proposed Architecture
Scalability
Low
Medium
Low
High
Reliability
Medium
Medium
Medium
High
ULL Support
Low
Medium
High
High
Success Rate
Medium
Medium
Medium
High
Reiter et al. proposed a novel architecture for Hybrid Mobile
Edge Computing by dynamically using the edge-computing-
provided computational power in order to overcome battery
limitations and performance constraints. Although their re-
search has considered the improvement of performance and
energy consumption of Edge Computing, their proposed archi-
tecture is not scalable for ultra-low latency applications, which
require fast communication and ultra-speed data processing
with next-generation technologies such as Massive MIMO or
beyond the 5G networks. In [60], L. Pu et al. proposed a
novel hybrid edge computing framework for future large-scale
vehicular crowdsensing applications to augment the resources
of connected vehicles.
B. Open Research Issues
In this section, we are going to discuss about the open issues
in the deployment of 5G Edge Computing [61] [62]:
• Quality of Experience (QoE): QoE measures the level
of the customers satisfaction with the provided service.
QoE is different from QoS and embodies the notion
that the hardware and software characteristics could be
guaranteed and enhanced
• Interoperability and Standardization: Standardization
requires related organizations to provide a set of uni-
versally acceptable rules for 5G Edge Computing. The
diversion of customization by different vendors has made
it difﬁcult to agree upon a standard. Billions of devices
are going to use various interfaces for communication
between UEs and edge clouds. Therefore, organizations
such as the European Telecommunications Standards
Institute (ETSI) have to be formed in order to address
interoperability issues.
• Security and Privacy: In order to address security issues
such as vulnerability at the edge of the network, we
need a scalable solution that manages trust and privacy
concerning complexity and cost.
V I I . CONC LU S ION
Edge Computing in 5G and Beyond is a promising solution
for ultra-low latency applications that are sensitive to delay
and require fast data processing. In this paper, we profoundly
studied Edge Computing and investigated the role of 5G in
Edge Computing. Then, we proposed a hybrid architecture,
consisting of MEC and Edge Cloud, based on the requirements
of delay-sensitive use cases of 5G Edge Computing. In order
to evaluate the proposed architecture, we performed an agent-
based simulation on the three models, Fog Computing, 5G
MEC, and the proposed architecture, and demonstrated that
the proposed architecture decreases the latency up to 11%
compared to 5G MEC. Finally, as the conclusion, we compared
the proposed architecture with similar hybrid designed archi-
tectures for Edge Computing, and discussed the open issues
while looking at the bigger picture.
R E F ER ENC E S
[1] Stergiou, Christos, Kostas E. Psannis, Byung-Gyu Kim, and Brij B.
Gupta. 2018. Secure Integration of IoT and Cloud Computing. Future
Generation Computer Systems 78: 96475.
[2] Roman, Rodrigo, Javier Lopez, and Masahiro Mambo. 2018. Mobile
Edge Computing, Fog et Al.: A Survey and Analysis of Security Threats
and Challenges. Future Generation Computer Systems 78 (1): 68098.
[3] Statista. (2020). Information technology (IT) services and business
services revenue from 2017 to 2023, by region (in billion U.S. dollars).
Retrieved from https://www.statista.com/statistics/784089/worldwide-it-
services-business-service-revenue-by-region/
[4] Al-Fuqaha, Ala, Mohsen Guizani, Mehdi Mohammadi, Mohammed
Aledhari, and Moussa Ayyash. 2015. Internet of Things: A Survey on
Enabling Technologies, Protocols, and Applications. IEEE Communica-
tions Surveys and Tutorials 17 (4): 234776.
[5] Rahimi, Hamed, and Dhayananth Dharmalingam. 2020. Road Quality
Analysis Based on Cognitive Internet of Vehicles (CIoV). ArXiv Preprint
arXiv:2004.09287.
[6] A. Yousefpour et al., All one needs to know about fog computing
and related edge computing paradigms: A complete survey, Jour-
nal of Systems Architecture, vol. 98, pp. 289330, Sep. 2019, doi:
10.1016/j.sysarc.2019.02.009.
[7] W. Z. Khan, E. Ahmed, S. Hakak, I. Yaqoob, and A. Ahmed, Edge
computing: A survey, Future Generation Computer Systems, vol. 97,
pp. 219235, Aug. 2019, doi: 10.1016/j.future.2019.02.050.
[8] Y. Ai, M. Peng, and K. Zhang, Edge computing technologies for Internet
of Things: a primer, Digital Communications and Networks, vol. 4, no.
2, pp. 7786, Apr. 2018, doi: 10.1016/j.dcan.2017.07.001.
[9] Shi, Weisong, Jie Cao, Quan Zhang, Youhuizi Li, and Lanyu Xu.
2016. Edge Computing: Vision and Challenges. IEEE Internet of Things
Journal 3 (5): 63746.
[10] Mach, Pavel, and Zdenek Becvar. Mobile Edge Computing: A Survey
on Architecture and Computation Ofﬂoading. IEEE Communications
Surveys and Tutorials, vol. 19, no. 3, 2017, pp. 16281656.
[11] Rimal, Bhaskar Prasad, Dung Pham Van, and Martin Maier. 2016.
Mobile-Edge Computing vs. Centralized Cloud Computing in Fiber-
Wireless Access Networks. In 35th IEEE Conference on Computer
Communications Workshops, INFOCOM WKSHPS 2016, 10 April 2016
through 14 April 2016, 99196.
[12] Sodhro, Ali Hassan, Zongwei Luo, Arun Kumar Sangaiah, and Sung
Wook Baik. 2019. Mobile Edge Computing Based QoS Optimization in
Medical Healthcare Applications. International Journal of Information
Management 45: 30818.
[13] Alrawais, Arwa, Abdulrahman Alhothaily, Chunqiang Hu, and Xiuzhen
Cheng. 2017. Fog Computing for the Internet of Things: Security and
Privacy Issues. IEEE Internet Computing 21 (2): 3442.
[14] Agiwal, Mamta, Abhishek Roy, and Navrati Saxena. 2016. Next Gener-
ation 5G Wireless Networks: A Comprehensive Survey. IEEE Commu-
nications Surveys and Tutorials 18 (3): 161755.
[15] Rahimi, Hamed, Ali Zibaeenejad, and Ali Akbar Safavi. 2018. A Novel
IoT Architecture Based on 5G-IoT and Next Generation Technologies. In
2018 IEEE 9th Annual Information Technology, Electronics and Mobile
Communication Conference (IEMCON).
[16] International Data Corporation (IDC). (2019). IDC Forecasts World-
wide 5G Connections to Reach 1.01 Billion in 2023. Retrieved from
https://www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?containerId=prUS45740019
[17] N. Hassan, K.-L. A. Yau, and C. Wu, Edge Computing in 5G: A Re-
view, IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 127276127289, 2019, doi: 10.1109/AC-
CESS.2019.2938534.
[18] A. A. Barakabitze, A. Ahmad, R. Mijumbi, and A. Hines, 5G network
slicing using SDN and NFV: A survey of taxonomy, architectures and
future challenges, Computer Networks, vol. 167, p. 106984, Feb. 2020,
doi: 10.1016/j.comnet.2019.106984.
[19] R. S. Alonso, I. Sittn-Candanedo, S. Rodrguez-Gonzlez, . Garca, and J.
Prieto, A Survey on Software-Deﬁned Networks and Edge Computing
over IoT, in Highlights of Practical Applications of Survivable Agents
and Multi-Agent Systems. The PAAMS Collection, vol. 1047, F. De La
Prieta, A. Gonzlez-Briones, P. Pawleski, D. Calvaresi, E. Del Val, F.
Lopes, V. Julian, E. Osaba, and R. Snchez-Iborra, Eds. Cham: Springer
International Publishing, 2019, pp. 289301.
[20] H.-C. Hsieh, J.-L. Chen, and A. Benslimane, 5G Virtualized Multi-
access Edge Computing Platform for IoT Applications, Journal of
Network and Computer Applications, vol. 115, pp. 94102, Aug. 2018,
doi: 10.1016/j.jnca.2018.05.001.
[21] Shi, Weisong, Jie Cao, Quan Zhang, Youhuizi Li, and Lanyu Xu.
2016. Edge Computing: Vision and Challenges. IEEE Internet of Things
Journal 3 (5): 63746.
[22] S. Wang, Y. Zhao, J. Xu, J. Yuan, and C.-H. Hsu, Edge server placement
in mobile edge computing, Journal of Parallel and Distributed Comput-
ing, vol. 127, pp. 160168, May 2019, doi: 10.1016/j.jpdc.2018.06.008.
[23] X. Xu, D. Li, Z. Dai, S. Li, and X. Chen, A Heuristic Ofﬂoading Method
for Deep Learning Edge Services in 5G Networks, IEEE Access, vol.
7, pp. 6773467744, 2019, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2918585.
[24] Grand View Research.
(2020). Edge Computing Market Worth
$43.4 Billion By
2027 — CAGR:
37.4%. Retrieved
from
www.grandviewresearch.com/press-release/global-edge-computing-
market
[25] McKinsey&Company.
(2018). New demand, new markets: What
edge computing means for hardware companies. Retrieved from
https://www.mckinsey.com/
/media/McKinsey/Industries/Technology
Media and Telecommunications/High Tech/Our Insights/New demand
new markets What edge computing means for hardware companies/New-
demand-new-markets-What-edge-computing-means.pdf
[26] Zhang, Ke, Yuming Mao, Supeng Leng, Quanxin Zhao, Longjiang Li,
Xin Peng, Li Pan, Sabita Maharjan, and Yan Zhang. 2016. Energy-
Efﬁcient Ofﬂoading for Mobile Edge Computing in 5G Heterogeneous
Networks. IEEE Access 4: 58965907.
[27] M. Peng, S. Yan, K. Zhang, and C. Wang, Fog-computing-based radio
access networks: issues and challenges, IEEE Network, vol. 30, no. 4,
pp. 4653, Jul. 2016, doi: 10.1109/MNET.2016.7513863.
[28] Puliaﬁto, Carlo, Enzo Mingozzi, Francesco Longo, Antonio Puliaﬁto,
and Omer Rana. 2019. Fog Computing for the Internet of Things: A
Survey. ACM Transactions on Internet Technology 19 (2): 18.
[29] Jararweh, Yaser, Ahmad Doulat, Omar AlQudah, Ejaz Ahmed, Mah-
moud Al-Ayyoub, and Elhadj Benkhelifa. 2016. The Future of Mobile
Cloud Computing: Integrating Cloudlets and Mobile Edge Computing.
In 2016 23rd International Conference on Telecommunications (ICT),
15.
[30] T. Taleb, K. Samdanis, B. Mada, H. Flinck, S. Dutta, and D.
Sabella, On Multi-Access Edge Computing: A Survey of the Emerg-
ing 5G Network Edge Cloud Architecture and Orchestration, IEEE
Commun. Surv. Tutorials, vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 16571681, 2017, doi:
10.1109/COMST.2017.2705720.
[31] F. Giust , G. Verin , K. Antevski , C. Joey , Y. Fang , W. Featherstone
, F. Fontes , et al. , Mec deployments in 4g and evolution towards 5g,
ETSI White Paper 24 (2018) 124 .
[32] Q.-V. Pham et al., A Survey of Multi-Access Edge Computing in 5G
and Beyond: Fundamentals, Technology Integration, and State-of-the-
Art, arXiv:1906.08452 [cs, math], Jan. 2020, Accessed: Apr. 23, 2020.
[Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1906.08452.
[33] Shaﬁ, Mansoor, Andreas F. Molisch, Peter J. Smith, Thomas Haustein,
Peiying Zhu, Prasan De Silva, Fredrik Tufvesson, Anass Benjebbour, and
Gerhard Wunder. 2017. 5G: A Tutorial Overview of Standards, Trials,
Challenges, Deployment, and Practice. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas
in Communications 35 (6): 120121.
[34] H. Huang, W. Miao, G. Min, and C. Luo, Mobile Edge Computing for
5G Internet of Things, p. 27.
[35] 3GPP. ”System architecture for the 5G System (5GS).” (2019).
[36] S. Chandrashekar, A. Maeder, C. Sartori, T. Hhne, B. Vejlgaard and
D. Chandramouli, ”5G multi-RAT multi-connectivity architecture,” 2016
IEEE International Conference on Communications Workshops (ICC),
Kuala Lumpur, 2016, pp. 180-186, doi: 10.1109/ICCW.2016.7503785.
[37] Gupta, A., and R. K. Jha. A Survey of 5G Network: Architecture and
Emerging Technologies. IEEE Access, vol. 3, no. 3, 2015, pp. 12061232.
[38] Cosmas, J., et al. ”5G PPP Architecture Working Group View on 5G
Architecture.” (2019).
[39] Huang, Tongyi, et al. ”A survey on green 6G network: Architecture and
technologies.” IEEE Access 7 (2019): 175758-175768.
[40] Tran, Tuyen X., Abolfazl Hajisami, Parul Pandey, and Dario Pompili.
2017. Collaborative Mobile Edge Computing in 5G Networks: New
Paradigms, Scenarios, and Challenges. IEEE Communications Magazine
55 (4): 5461.
[41] Zong, Baiqing, et al. ”6G technologies: Key drivers, core requirements,
system architectures, and enabling technologies.” IEEE Vehicular Tech-
nology Magazine 14.3 (2019): 18-27.
[42] Zhao, Jun, and Yang Liu. ”A survey of intelligent reﬂecting surfaces
(IRSs): Towards 6G wireless communication networks.” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1907.04789 (2019).
[43] Araujo, Daniel C., Taras Maksymyuk, Andr L. F. de Almeida, Tarcisio
F. Maciel, Joo Cesar M. Mota, and Minho Jo. 2016. Massive MIMO:
Survey and Future Research Topics. Iet Communications 10 (15):
193846.
[44] L. Tang and S. He, Multi-User Computation Ofﬂoading in Mobile Edge
Computing: A Behavioral Perspective, IEEE Network, vol. 32, no. 1,
pp. 4853, Jan. 2018, doi: 10.1109/MNET.2018.1700119.
[45] Parkvall, Stefan, Erik Dahlman, Anders Furuskar, and Mattias Frenne.
2017. NR: The New 5G Radio Access Technology. IEEE Communica-
tions Standards Magazine 1 (4): 2430.
[46] Gandotra, Pimmy, Rakesh Kumar Jha, and Sanjeev Jain. 2017. A Survey
on Device-to-Device (D2D) Communication. Journal of Network and
Computer Applications 78: 929.
[47] Wang, Tong, Yunfeng Wang, Bingyi Liu, Xibo Wang, Jianfeng Zhang,
Azhar Hussain, Peng Wang, and Yue Cao. 2018. A Novel Crosslayer
Communication Protocol for Vehicular Sensor Networks. International
Journal of Communication Systems 31 (7).
[48] Satyanarayanan, Mahadev. 2017. The Emergence of Edge Computing.
IEEE Computer 50 (1): 3039.
[49] H.-C. Hsieh, J.-L. Chen, and A. Benslimane, 5G Virtualized Multi-
access Edge Computing Platform for IoT Applications, Journal of
Network and Computer Applications, vol. 115, pp. 94102, Aug. 2018,
doi: 10.1016/j.jnca.2018.05.001.
[50] Mao, Yuyi, Changsheng You, Jun Zhang, Kaibin Huang, and Khaled B.
Letaief. 2017. A Survey on Mobile Edge Computing: The Communica-
tion Perspective. IEEE Communications Surveys and Tutorials 19 (4):
232258.
[51] Walrand, Jean, and Shyam Parekh. 2017. Communication Networks: A
Concise Introduction, Second Edition.
[52] Google. (2020). Edge TPU: Googles purpose-built ASIC designed to run
inference at the edge. Retrieved from https://cloud.google.com/edge-tpu
[53] Rajabzadeh, Parsa, and Hamed Rahim. 2020. An Agent-Based Control
System for Wireless Sensor and Actuator Networks. ViXra.
[54] Wen, Guoguang. 2017. Distributed Cooperative Control of Multi-Agent
Systems.
[55] Railsback, Steven F., et al. Agent-Based Simulation Platforms: Review
and Development Recommendations. International Conference on Ad-
vances in System Simulation, vol. 82, no. 9, 2006, pp. 609623.
[56] Boissier, Olivier, Rafael H. Bordini, Jomi F. Hbner, Alessandro Ricci,
and Andrea Santi. 2013. Multi-Agent Oriented Programming with
JaCaMo. Science of Computer Programming 78 (6): 74761.
[57] osBrain
-
0.6.5.
(2020). What
is
osBrain?. Retrieved
https://osbrain.readthedocs.io/en/stable/
[58] Li, Xiaomin, et al. ”A hybrid computing solution and resource schedul-
ing strategy for edge computing in smart manufacturing.” IEEE Trans-
actions on Industrial Informatics 15.7 (2019): 4225-4234.
[59] Reiter, Andreas, Bernd Prnster, and Thomas Zefferer. ”Hybrid mobile
edge computing: Unleashing the full potential of edge computing in mo-
bile device use cases.” 2017 17th IEEE/ACM International Symposium
on Cluster, Cloud and Grid Computing (CCGRID). IEEE, 2017.
[60] Pu, Lingjun, et al. ”Chimera: An energy-efﬁcient and deadline-aware
hybrid edge computing framework for vehicular crowdsensing applica-
tions.” IEEE Internet of Things Journal 6.1 (2018): 84-99.
from
[61] Rahimi, Hamed, Ali Zibaeenejad, Parsa Rajabzadeh, and Ali Akbar
Safavi. 2018. On the Security of the 5G-IoT Architecture. In Proceedings
of the International Conference on Smart Cities and Internet of Things,
10.
[62] Shahzadi, Sonia, Muddesar Iqbal, Tasos Dagiuklas, and Zia Ul Qayyum.
2017. Multi-Access Edge Computing: Open Issues, Challenges and
Future Perspectives. Ieee International Conference on Cloud Computing
Technology and Science 6 (1): 30.
