0
2
0
2
g
u
A
1
3
]
G
C
.
s
c
[
1
v
6
1
1
0
0
.
9
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a
On Polyhedral Realization with Isosceles Triangles
David Eppstein
Computer Science Department, University of California, Irvine
Abstract
Answering a question posed by Joseph Malkevitch, we prove that there exists a polyhedral
graph, with triangular faces, such that every realization of it as the graph of a convex polyhedron
includes at least one face that is a scalene triangle. Our construction is based on Kleetopes, and
shows that there exists an integer i such that all convex i-iterated Kleetopes have a scalene face.
However, we also show that all Kleetopes of triangulated polyhedral graphs have non-convex
non-self-crossing realizations in which all faces are isosceles. We answer another question of
Malkevitch by observing that a spherical tiling of Dawson (2005) leads to a fourth inﬁnite family
of convex polyhedra in which all faces are congruent isosceles triangles, adding one to the three
families previously known to Malkevitch. We prove that the graphs of convex polyhedra with
congruent isosceles faces have bounded diameter and have dominating sets of bounded size.
1
Introduction
By Steinitz’s theorem, the graphs of three-dimensional convex polyhedra are exactly the 3-vertex-
connected planar graphs [13]. The faces of the polyhedron are uniquely determined as the peripheral
cycles of the graph: simple cycles such that every two edges that are not in the cycle can be connected
by a path whose interior vertices are disjoint from the cycle [16]. We call such a graph a polyhedral
graph, and if in addition all faces are triangles we call it a triangulation. If G is the graph of a
polyhedron P , we call P a realization of G; here, P is required only to be non-self-intersecting, not
necessarily convex, but if it is convex we call P a convex realization. We may ask: what constraints
are possible on the shapes of the faces of P [2]?
We call a realization or polyhedron isosceles if all faces are isosceles triangles, and monohedral
if all faces are congruent.1 Monohedral isosceles convex polyhedra were investigated by Goldberg
in 1936, who observed the existence of an inﬁnite family of these polyhedra (beyond the obvious
example of the bipyramids), obtained by gluing pyramids to the non-triangular faces of antiprisms [7]
(Figure 1, left). In 2001, Joseph Malkevitch described a triangulation that has no monohedral
isosceles convex realization [10]; in response, Branko Gr¨unbaum described a triangulation that
has no monohedral realization, regardless of convexity of the realization and regardless of face
shape [9]. However, Gr¨unbaum’s triangulation can be realized with all faces isosceles or equilatera
( Figure 1, right). More recently, Malkevitch has asked again which triangulations have isosceles
convex realizations, not required to be congruent, and whether all triangulations have such a
realization [11]. Isosceles polyhedra have also been studied in connection with unfolding polyhedra
into nets: there exist non-convex isosceles polyhedra with all faces acute that have no such unfolding,
while it remains open whether all convex polyhedra have an unfolding [3, 5].
In this work, we provide the following results:
1This terminology should be distinguished from isohedral polyhedra, in which every two faces are symmetric to
each other.
1
Figure 1: Left: A polyhedron of Goldberg [7], with 100 congruent isosceles triangle faces. Right: A
triangulation of Gr¨unbaum that cannot be realized with all faces congruent [9], realized as a convex
polyhedron with edges of two lengths, and with isosceles and equilateral triangle faces.
• We prove that some triangulations have no convex isosceles realization. We use the idea of a
Kleetope, a construction named after Victor Klee in which a polyhedron or polyhedral graph
is modiﬁed by gluing a pyramid onto each face [8]. We show that repeating the Kleetope
construction a bounded number of times, starting from any polyhedral graph, will produce a
triangulation that has no convex isosceles realization.
• We prove that the triangulations produced by this construction, and more generally all the
Kleetopes of triangulations, have non-convex isosceles realizations.
• We answer an open question posed by Malkevitch [11] by ﬁnding a fourth inﬁnite family of
monohedral isosceles convex polyhedra, diﬀerent from three previously known inﬁnite families.
• We investigate the structure of monohedral isosceles convex polyhedra with many faces,
proving that they must have very sharp apex angles, bounded graph diameter, and bounded
dominating set size.
2 Preliminaries
2.1 Kleetopes and shortness
If G is a polyhedral graph, then its Kleetope is another polyhedral graph, obtained by adding
to G a vertex for each face of P , adjacent to every vertex of the face. We denote the Kleetope by
KG, and we denote the result of repeating the Kleetope operation i times by K iG. For instance,
Figure 2 (left) shows a convex realization of K 2O , where O = K2,2,2 is the graph of an octahedron.
Geometrically, a realization of a Kleetope can be obtained from a realization of G by attaching a
pyramid to each face of G. When G is a triangulation, every convex realization of KG leads to a
convex realization of G, obtained by removing the added vertices of KG. (In the non-convex case,
this removal may lead to self-intersections. The property that G is a triangulation and not just an
arbitrary polyhedral graph is needed to ensure that each pyramid has a ﬂat base.)
One of the earliest applications of Kleetopes was in the construction of triangulations in which
all paths or cycles are short. If G is a triangulation with n vertices, then it has 2n − 4 triangles
2
Figure 2: Left: Iterated Kleetope K 2O of an octahedron O. Right: Its non-convex isosceles
realization.
and KG has 3n − 4 vertices. However, in a simple cycle of KG, no two vertices of KG \ G can be
adjacent, and replacing each such vertex by the edge between its two neighbors in G produces a
simple cycle of G. Therefore, if the longest simple cycle in G has length c, then the longest simple
cycle in KG has length 2c. Thus, the cycle length only increases by a factor of two, while the
number of vertices increases by a factor converging (for large n) to three. Iterating this process
produces n-vertex triangulations in which the longest path or cycle has length O(nlog3 2 ) [12], and
iterating it a bounded number of times produces the following result in the form that we need it:
Lemma 1. For every ε there is an i such that, for al l polyhedral graphs G, the longest simple cycle
in K iG includes a fraction of the vertices of K iG that is less than ε.
Proof. If G is a polyhedral graph, KG is simplicial and has at least 8 vertices. Each subsequent
iteration of the Kleetope operation multiplies the number of vertices by at least 5/2 and multiples
the longest cycle length by at most 2, so we may take i to be 1 + log5/4 1/ε.
2.2 Discrete Gauss map
The discrete Gauss map of a polyhedron (in a ﬁxed position in R3 ) maps each feature of the
polyhedron to a set of three-dimensional unit vectors, the outward-pointing perpendicular vectors
of supporting planes of the polyhedron (planes that intersect its boundary but not its interior) that
are tangent to the polyhedron at that feature. The set of all unit vectors forms a unit sphere, the
Gauss sphere, on which each face of the polyhedron is mapped to a single point, each edge of the
polyhedron is mapped to an arc of a great circle, and each vertex of the polyhedron is mapped to a
convex region bounded by arcs of great circles. That is, the Gauss map is a dimension-reversing
map from the features of the given polyhedron to features of a polygonal subdivision of the sphere,
sometimes called the spherical dual of the polyhedron [14].
We refer to distances along the surface of the Gauss sphere as geodesic distance, and the maximum
distance between any two points in a given set of unit vectors on the sphere as geodesic diameter. If
the Gauss map takes two adjacent faces of the polyhedron to points whose geodesic distance is d,
then the dihedral angle of the faces is exactly π − d.
3
Figure 3: Left: The case of Lemma 2 with two bases on F , viewed in pro jection onto the plane
containing F . The three edges of T disjoint from f (red) have equal lengths, and meet on a line
perpendicular to the plane of F through the circumcenter of F (seen in pro jection as the small
yellow circle). Right: The convex hull of two congruent isosceles triangles rotated around a shared
edge, used in the case of the lemma with two shared bases and the case with a long side. At an
endpoint of the shared edge, either the shared dihedral or the other two equal dihedrals are greater
than π/3.
3 Nonexistence of convex isosceles realizations
In this section we prove that iterated Kleetopes (with a suﬃciently large number of iterations) do
not have a convex realization with all faces isosceles. Our proof proceeds in stages, where each
stage adds more iterations to the Kleetope and proves the existence of a face whose shape and
neighborhood is more strongly constrained, until the constraints are suﬃcient to rule out isosceles
triangles as faces. We will eventually show that in the ﬁnal stage of the Kleetope construction
process, it will be necessary to glue on a triangular pyramid with an obtuse base triangle, isosceles
faces other than the base, and small (very sharp) dihedral angles at the base edges of the pyramid.
However, pyramids with these properties do not exist, as the next subsection shows.
3.1 Isosceles pyramids with obtuse bases
Every vertex of every convex polyhedron has an incident edge with dihedral angle > π/3, but in
some polyhedra (for instance ﬂattened pyramids) these large dihedral angles avoid one of the faces.
The main result of this section is that in tetrahedra with one face obtuse and the rest isosceles, the
obtuse face cannot be avoided by the large dihedrals:
Lemma 2. Let T be a tetrahedron in which one face F is obtuse, and the other three faces are
isosceles. Then at least one of the dihedral angles on an edge of F is greater than π/3.
Proof. We divide into cases according to how the base and apex of each isosceles triangle are
arranged relative to F .
Two bases on F . If at least two of the isosceles triangles have their base on an edge of F , then
the three edges of T that are disjoint from F have equal length, and the vertex of T where
these edges meet lies on a line perpendicular to F through the circumcenter of F . Because F
4
Figure 4: Left: Notation for the case of Lemma 2 of two shared apexes. Right: Notation for the
ﬁnal “none of the above” case, shown schematically with equal-length edges in equal colors.
is obtuse, its long side separates the circumcenter from F , so the dihedral of T on the long
side of F is at least π/2. (See Figure 3, left. This case requires f to be obtuse.)
Two shared bases. If two of the three isosceles triangles share a base edge with each other, then
in each of them one of the two equal sides is an edge of F . The third isosceles triangle has
edges of these lengths, equal to the lengths of two edges of F , so it is congruent with F , and
rotated from F around the edge e that it shares with F . Figure 3 (right) depicts the case
where the shared edge is the base of the isosceles triangle, but it could also be one of the sides.
Because the two triangles on e are congruent, the vertex ﬁgure of T at either endpoint of e
(the intersection of T with a suﬃciently small sphere centered on that point) is a spherical
isosceles triangle. Like any spherical triangle its angles sum to greater than π so one angle is
at least π/3. This large angle is either the dihedral at e (the apex of the spherical isosceles
triangle) or is the equal dihedral at the other two edges meeting at the same vertex of T , one
of which is an edge of F . (This case does not require f to be obtuse, and can produce dihedral
angles arbitrarily close to π/3.)
Long side. If the long edge e of F is one of the two equal sides of one of the isosceles triangles,
consider the tetrahedron T (cid:48) formed as the convex hull of F and a rotated copy of F by an
angle of π/3 around e (on the same side of the plane through F as T ). As in the case of two
shared bases, the vertex ﬁgures at the endpoints of e are spherical isosceles triangles, and
the choice of π/3 as rotation angle implies that, in T (cid:48) , all the dihedrals at the endpoints of e
(which include all three dihedrals on the edges of f ) are at least π/3.
The two endpoints of e are the unique farthest pair of points in T (cid:48) , so the edge of T of equal
length to e must end at a point outside T (cid:48) . This point is separated from T (cid:48) by one of the face
planes of T (cid:48) , which meets F at one of its edges. The dihedral of T on that edge is greater
than the dihedral of T (cid:48) , which is in turn at least π/3.
Two shared apexes. If two of the isosceles faces of T both have their apex at the same vertex v
of F , then the three edges of T meeting at that vertex all have the same length (cid:96). As two
of them are edges of F , F must be isosceles, with these edges as its sides. We can view this
5
case in pro jection onto a plane perpendicular to F through its center line. Of the three equal
shared edges, the edge e that is disjoint from F lies in this plane, while the other two lie in
symmetric positions on either side of it, and pro ject to a point p at the midpoint of the base
of F . Triangle F itself pro jects to a line segment s connecting v to p. Let q be the non-shared
endpoint of edge e (Figure 4, left).
Then, in triangle vpq , edge vq is longer than edge vp, because vp is the pro jection of a
three-dimensional line segment of equal length to vq . Let θ = max(
can be interpreted as stating that one cannot glue an isosceles pyramid onto an obtuse triangle of
sharpness less than π/3 while preserving the convexity of the resulting polyhedron.
It is possible for a convex polyhedron to have arbitrarily many faces which all have large
sharpness; consider, for instance, the realizations of bipyramids (Figure 6, left). As we show now,
this is not true of suﬃciently-iterated Kleetopes.
Lemma 3. For every ε there exists i such that, for al l polyhedral graphs G and al l convex realizations
of K iG, the realization includes at least one face whose sharpness is ≤ ε.
Proof. Construct an arrangement of c = O(1/ε) great circles on the Gauss sphere that partition
the sphere into cells with geodesic diameter at most , for instance by choosing two points on the
sphere at geodesic distance π/2 and choosing for both points a collection of great circles crossing
each other at equal angles at that point. By Lemma 1, let i be such that the longest cycle in K iG
includes a fraction less than 1/3c of the edges of K iG. We claim that i has the stated property.
To prove this, consider any given choice of G and convex realization of K iG, and rotate the
arrangement of great circles (if necessary) so that none of them passes through a vertex of the
spherical dual of K iG. Then each of the great circles passes through a sequence of edges and faces
of the spherical dual corresponding to a simple cycle in K iG, the cycle formed as the silhouette
of K iG in a perpendicular pro jection onto the plane of the great circle. By Lemma 1 and the choice
of i, these silhouette cycles together use a fraction less than 1/3 of the edges of K iG. It follows
that at least one face F of K iG is bounded by edges that are not in any silhouette cycle, for if all
faces had at least one edge in a cycle the total fraction of edges in cycles would be at least 1/3.
The Gaussian images of F and its three neighboring triangles in K iG are all in the same cell of
the arrangement of great circles, of geodesic diameter at most ε. It follows that the edge from the
Gaussian image of F to the farthest of its neighbors has length at most ε.
If we glue a pyramid onto a face F of a convex polyhedron to produce another convex polyhedron
(as happens for realizations of Kleetopes), the faces of the pyramid that replace F can have greater
sharpness than F had. However, the sharpness cannot increase too much:
Lemma 4. Let P be a triangulation, let Q be a convex realization of K iP for some i, and let F
be a face of P that (in the realization of P derived from Q by removing the vertices of Q \ P ) has
sharpness ε. Then every face of Q formed by subdividing F has sharpness at most 2ε.
Proof. On the Gaussian sphere, the image of F is a point, incident to three great circle arcs of length
at most ε corresponding to the dihedrals along the edges of F . The spherical triangle T forming
the convex hull of these three arcs has geodesic diameter at most 2ε, by the triangle inequality.
Subdividing F to form Q replaces the Gaussian image of F (a single vertex in the spherical dual
of P ) by a subgraph, attached to the rest of the graph at three vertices on the same three arcs.
The sharpness of any face of the subdivision equals the length of the longest edge incident to its
Gaussian image, which may either be an edge of this subgraph or one of the three edges connecting
this subgraph to the rest of the graph. All of these edges lie within spherical triangle T , so their
lengths are at most the diameter of T , which is at most 2ε.
3.3 Kleetopes have obtuse faces
The tetrahedron formed as the convex hull of the origin and the three perpendicular unit basis
vectors of three-dimensional space has the same shape as the truncated corner of a cube, with
three isosceles right triangle faces and one equilateral face. When the right triangle faces are
pro jected perpendicularly onto the equilateral face, their pro jections are isosceles triangles with
7
Figure 5: A semi-ellipse (pro jected from a semicircle) and a circular arc through the same three
points (endpoints of e and the center c of an equilateral triangle on edge e) separate points that
pro ject from an acute angle and points that pro ject to an angle > 2π/3 in the proof of Lemma 5.
apex angle 2π/3 and base angles π/6. The dihedral angles of this tetrahedron are π/2 between pairs
2 cos−1 (− 1
3 ) ≈ 0.304 π between the right triangles and the equilateral
of right-triangle faces, and 1
triangles; we use ϕ to denote this latter angle. The familiar geometry of this example forms the
extreme case for the following lemma:
Lemma 5. Let T be a triangle in R3 , let e be an edge of T , and P be a plane through e forming an
angle less than ϕ with the plane of T . Suppose that the perpendicular projection T (cid:48) of T onto P is a
triangle T (cid:48) whose largest angle is at least 2π/3, at the vertex opposite e. Then T is obtuse.
Proof. Increasing the angle between the plane of T and P can only increase the largest angle of T (cid:48) ,
so we may assume without loss of generality that the angle between the plane of T and P is exactly
ϕ, and prove that in this case T is either right or obtuse. In the plane of T , the points p that form
an acute vertex of a triangle with opposite edge e are separated from the points that form an obtuse
vertex by a semicircle having e as its diameter. The midpoint of this semicircle is a point that,
together with e, forms an isosceles right triangle, and its pro jection onto P is the center point c of
an equilateral triangle that has e as one of its three sides. The pro jection of the semicircle itself
onto P is a semi-ellipse having e as its diameter and passing through c (the boundary of the outer
yellow region in Figure 5).
In P , the points q that form a vertex of angle > 2π/3 triangle with opposite side e are separated
from the points that form a vertex of angle < 2π/3 by a circular arc of angle π/3 connecting the
two endpoints of e through c (the boundary of the inner blue region in Figure 5). This circular arc
lies inside the semi-ellipse, except for the endpoints of e (where the circle and ellipse, if continued,
would cross) and the point c where the two curves are tangent (counting as a double contact and
using up all four possible points of intersection of a circle and ellipse). For T (cid:48) to have angle at
least 2π/3 opposite e, its vertex must be on or inside the circular arc, and therefore either inside
the semi-ellipse or on it at c. To pro ject to a point on or inside the semi-ellipse, the vertex of T
opposite v must be on or inside the semi-circle, and therefore T must be obtuse or right.
Using this lemma, we can prove that suﬃciently iterated Kleetopes have an obtuse face, and,
moreover, one with low sharpness:
8
Lemma 6. Let ε be a positive number with ε < ϕ, let i be an integer large enough that, by Lemma 3,
every convex realization of K iP has a face of sharpness less than , and let P be any triangulation.
Then every convex realization of K i+1P has an obtuse-triangle face of sharpness less than 2ε.
Proof. Given a realization of K i+1P , form from it a realization of K iP by removing the extra
vertices added in going from K iP to K i+1P , and apply Lemma 3 to this realization to ﬁnd a face F
of K iP whose sharpness is less than ε. Now consider the three faces that subdivide F in K i+1P , and
pro ject these three faces perpendicularly onto the plane of F . Their pro jections must be contained
within F , for otherwise the angle between one of these faces and F would be greater than π/2, too
big to form a convex dihedral with the neighboring face across the edge of F given the low sharpness
of F itself. Therefore, within the plane of pro jection, these three pro jected triangles subdivide F
and meet at a shared vertex interior to F . If F (cid:48) is the face of K i+1 whose pro jection has the largest
angle at this shared vertex, then this angle is least 2π/3. By the assumption on the sharpness of F ,
the plane of F (cid:48) makes an angle less than ϕ with the plane of F , so we can apply Lemma 5 to F (cid:48)
and its pro jection. By this lemma, F (cid:48) is obtuse, and by Lemma 4 its sharpness is less than 2ε.
3.4 Iterated Kleetopes cannot be convex and iscosceles
Combining the results from this section, we have:
Theorem 7. There exists an integer j such that, for every triangulation P , every convex realization
of K j P has a non-isosceles face.
Proof. Let i be an integer large enough that, by Lemma 3, every convex realization of K iP has a
face of sharpness less than π/6, and let j = i + 2. Let P be an arbitrary triangulation. Consider
any convex realization of K j P , and the convex realization of K j−1P = K i+1P obtained from it by
deleting the last layer of added vertices. By Lemma 6, the realization of K j−1P has an obtuse face
F of sharpness less than π/3. If the realization of K j P had all-isosceles faces, Lemma 2 (applied to
the tetrahedron formed by F and the three isosceles triangles that subdivide it) would show that
one of these isosceles triangles lies in a plane making an angle greater than π/3 with the plane
of F . Because this angle is greater than the ﬂatness of F , it is impossible for such a triangle to
make a convex dihedral angle with whatever other triangle neighbors it across the edge it shares
with F , contradicting the assumption that the realization is convex. This contradiction shows that
the assumption that the realization has only isosceles triangles as its faces cannot be true.
4 Non-convex realization of Kleetopes
In this section we prove that, whenever G is a triangulation, KG has a non-convex realization in
which all faces are isosceles. In particular, this is true of the polyhedra that we we constructed as
examples that have no convex isosceles realization.
Theorem 8. Let P be a convex polyhedron whose graph G is a triangulation. Choose distance R,
for each face f of P place a new vertex at distance R from each of the three vertices of f , separated
from P by the plane of f , and replace f by three triangles through the new vertex and two of the
three vertices of f . Then for suﬃciently large values of R, the result is a non-self-crossing realization
of KG, in which al l faces are isosceles triangles.
Proof. Given any triangle f in three-dimensional space, two points at distance R from the three
vertices of f will exist whenever R is greater than the circumradius rf of f . These two points are
symmetric from each other across the plane of f , and the constraint that this plane separates each
9
Figure 6: Left: Bipyramid. Right: Biarc hull.
new point from P uniquely determines the placement used in the theorem. Therefore, whenever R is
greater than maxf rf , the construction given in the statement of the theorem is well-deﬁned. Each
new face is a triangle with two sides of length R, so the isosceles shape of the faces is immediate. The
nontrivial part of the theorem is the claim that the resulting system of triangles is non-self-crossing.
The new point p for f lies on a line through the circumcenter of f , perpendicular to f . The
circumcenter has distance ≤ rf from each edge of f , and the new point is at distance at least R − rf
away from the plane of f , by the triangle inequality. It follows that, although the dihedral angle
between f and each triangle incident to p may be obtuse (as happens when f itself is obtuse), it
may not be very obtuse: it is π/2 + O(rf /R). By choosing R suﬃciently large, we may make this
angle as close to π/2 as we desire.
We observe that the Voronoi diagram of the faces of P (the partition of the space outside P into
cells within which one face is nearer than all others) has cells bounded by the planes bisecting the
dihedral angles of P . Let θ < π be the largest dihedral angle of P . Then, as long as we choose R
large enough that each dihedral angle between a new triangle and the face f that it replaces is less
than π − θ/2, each new point and its incident triangles will lie within the Voronoi cell of the face
that it replaces. Since these Voronoi cells are disjoint, the new triangles cannot cross each other.
Figure 2 (right) depicts a non-convex isosceles realization of the iterated Kleetope of the
octahedron, obtained by this construction.
5 Congruent isosceles faces
There are only eight convex polyhedra with congruent equilateral triangle faces, called deltahedra,
but inﬁnitely many non-convex deltahedra [6, 15]. Generalizing this concept, Malkevitch [11] asks
about convex polyhedra with congruent isosceles triangle faces. He states that there are three known
inﬁnite families of these monohedral isosceles convex polyhedra (leaving as a puzzle for the reader
ﬁnding these families) and poses as an open question whether there are any more. We answer this
question by identifying four families:
• The bipyramids are convex hulls of equally spaced points on a circle, together with two
additional points on the axis through the center of the circle, equally far from it on each side
(Figure 6, left).
• Let X and Y be two arcs of circles, each equidistant from the endpoints of the other arc, such
that both arcs lie on the boundary of the convex hull of their union. Then the convex hull
10
Figure 7: An order-25 twisted gyroelongated bipyramid.
of any ﬁnite set of points on both arcs that includes the endpoints of each arc consists of
equilateral triangles whose base connects two consecutive points on one arc and whose apex
is on the other arc. For any two integers x ≥ 2 and y ≥ 2 it is possible to choose two arcs,
such that x + 1 equally-spaced points on arc X and y + 1 equally-spaced points on arc Y
all have the same distance between consecutive points; for instance, as in Figure 6 (right),
this can be done by selecting X and Y to be concentric semicircles on perpendicular planes
with a carefully-chosen ratio of radii. The convex hull of the resulting point set has 2(x + y)
congruent isosceles triangles as faces; we call this shape a biarc hul l.
• Goldberg [7] constructed an inﬁnite family of convex polyhedra with congruent isosceles faces
by attaching pyramids to opposite faces of an antiprism (Figure 1, left). For an antiprism
over a k-gon, the result has 4k faces. The cases k = 4 and k = 5 can also be realized by
equilateral triangle faces, producing a gyroelongated square bipyramid and regular icosahedron
respectively. As the name “Goldberg polyhedra” already refers to an unrelated class of
polyhedra, we call the general case an order-k gyroelongated bipyramid.
• In a gyroelongated bipyramids of odd order k , the faces can be partitioned into two subsets,
separating each pair of opposite faces. For certain realizations of these polyhedra, the edges
separating these two subsets form a non-planar hexagon with order-6 symmetry. Twisting one
of the two subsets by an angle of 2π/3 leaves this hexagon in the same position and results in
another polyhedron, which we call the order-k twisted gyroelongated bipyramid (Figure 7).
We detail the construction below.
5.1 Twisted gyroelongated bipyramids
To understand the twisted gyroelongated bipyramids, it is helpful to into a little more detail about
Goldberg’s method for realizing order-k gyroelongated bipyramids in such a way that all faces are
congruent and isosceles. In Goldberg’s construction, all of the points lie on a unit sphere, with the
two pyramid apexes at its poles and the other points spaced equally around two circles of equal and
11
opposite latitude. Goldberg chooses these latitudes so that the spherical angles of the great-circle
arcs on the sphere, connecting the points in the same pattern as the polyhedron, are 2π/k at the
apex of each triangle and (1/2 − 1/2k)π at each base angle. In this way, k of these spherical triangles
meet with total angle 2π at each pole, and the ﬁve triangles meeting at each remaining point have
total angle (2/k + 4(1/2 − 1/2k))π = 2π . The angular excess of each triangle, the amount by which
its total angle exceeds π , is π/k ; for spherical triangles, the angular excess equals the area, so the
area of each triangle is exactly 1/4k times the surface area of the entire sphere. The subdivision of
the sphere into spherical triangles of this shape can be transformed into a polyhedron by taking
the convex hull of its vertices, and (as is true whenever a spherical triangulation consists only of
acute triangles) the combinatorial structure of the resulting convex hull is the same as the spherical
triangulation. In this way, one obtains a gyroelongated bipyramid with congruent isosceles faces
that is, moreover, both inscribed in the unit sphere and circumscribes another smaller sphere. The
polyhedron illustrated in Figure 1 (left) was constructed in this way.
Now, divide the resulting polyhedron into two polyhedral surfaces by a non-planar hexagon
through both poles, separating each face from its opposite face. The same subdivision into two
surfaces can also be made on the spherical triangulation from which the polyhedron was derived.
On the surface of the sphere, at each pole, the hexagon subdivides (k − 1)/2 spherical triangles
on one side from (k + 1)/2 spherical triangles on the other side, so its two edges make an angle of
(1 − 1/k)π with respect to each other at the poles. At each non-pole vertex, the hexagon subdivides
two spherical triangles (meeting at their base) on one side from three spherical triangles (at two
base angles and an apex) on the other, so its angle is 2(1/2 − 1/2k)π = (1 − 1/k)π . That is, this
hexagon lies on a sphere, has equal edge lengths, has equal angles, and splits the sphere into two
equal areas. It follows that it has order-6 symmetry: it can be twisted by an angle of 2π/3 or 4π/3,
or ﬂipped and then twisted, to produce the same hexagon. Applying the twist by an angle of 2π/3
to half of the triangles in Goldberg’s spherical triangulation (leaving the other half ﬁxed) produces
another spherical triangulation with congruent isosceles spherical triangles, which was described in
2005 by Robert Dawson [4].
Dawson’s spherical triangulation can be transformed into a monohedral isosceles polyhedron by
taking the convex hull of its vertices as in Goldberg’s construction. This produces a new polyhedron,
the twisted gyroelongated bipyramid, for every odd k > 5. For k = 3 it produces a triangulation of
a cube by some of the diagonals of its squares (with all faces right and isosceles, but not forming
a strictly convex polyhedron) and for k = 5 the twisting process leaves the regular icosahedron
unchanged. In relation to the work of Dawson, we remark that (for any n ≥ 2) it is also possible to
tile the sphere by 4n isosceles spherical triangles with base angle π/n and apex angle π(1 − 1/n),
meeting edge-to-edge in the pattern of a bipyramid. (This is the spherical analog of the non-convex
polyhedron depicted in Figure 8.) When n is odd, the resulting spherical triangulation again has a
skew hexagon with order-6 symmetry, and twisting one side of this skew hexagon by an angle of
2π/3 leads to another spherical triangulation with congruent isosceles spherical triangles, not listed
by Dawson. However, this construction does not directly lead to a convex polyhedron, because the
spherical triangles are not obtuse, and in Theorem 12 we will see more strongly that (with ﬁnitely
many exceptions) there is no convex polyhedron with isosceles triangles in this pattern.
We note that removing a small number of strips of four triangles, from pole to pole in one
of the two halves of the twisted gyroelongated bipyramid, but preserving the geometric shape of
the remaining triangles, results in a polyhedral surface that is less symmetric (there are diﬀerent
numbers of triangles on one of the two halves than the other) but still obeys the conditions of
Alexandrov’s uniqueness theorem characterizing the metric spaces derived from the surfaces of
polyhedra [1]: it is topologically spherical and locally Euclidean except at a ﬁnite number of points
of positive angular defect, with total angular defect 4π . It follows from Alexandrov’s theorem that
12
the result is the surface of a convex polyhedron, but the theorem does not tell us whether the
edges of the polyhedron follow the edges of the triangles from which the surface was derived, or
are rearranged into a diﬀerent combinatorial structure. If the edges of the resulting polyhedron
coincide with the edges of the triangles, the result would be a generalized asymmetric form of the
twisted gyroelongated bipyramid, with diﬀerent numbers of congruent isosceles triangles on each of
its two sides. We leave as open for future research whether this generalized twisted gyroelongated
bipyramid actually exists.
5.2 Sharp angles
The known inﬁnite families of monohedral isosceles convex polyhedra all have very sharp apex
angles when they have large numbers of faces. This is not a coincidence: as we show, in such a
polyhedron with n faces, the apex angle must be O(1/n).
Our proof depends on two ideas: ﬁrst, that in any convex polyhedron, the total angular deﬁcit
(the amount by which the sum of angles at each vertex fall short of 2π , summed over all vertices) is
exactly 4π ; this is Descartes’ theorem on total angular defect, a discrete form of the Gauss–Bonnet
theorem. Second, in a monohedral isosceles convex polyhedron, there are (usually) only a small
number of distinct types of vertex, as follows:
• If a vertex has only the apexes of isosceles triangles incident to it, we call it a pyramidal vertex.
• If a vertex has two bases of isosceles triangles and one or more apexes incident to it, we call it
a semipyramidal vertex.
• If a vertex has only four bases of isosceles triangles incident to it, we call it a basic vertex.
• If a vertex has four bases and one apex incident to it, we call it a semibasic vertex.
As a shorthand, we call a convex polyhedron with congruent isosceles faces whose vertices are
only of these four types wel l-behaved.
Observation 9. At any vertex of a monohedral isosceles convex polyhedron, the number of incident
base angles of faces is even, and these angles can be grouped together in pairs, adjacent across a
shared base edge of two isosceles triangles.
Observation 10. In a monohedral isosceles convex polyhedron, a vertex incident to four or more
base angles can be incident to at most one apex angle, so the wel l-behaved vertex types exhaust the
possible vertices that can be incident to zero, two, or four base angles.
Proof. A vertex of a monohedral isosceles convex polyhedron with four or more base angles can have
only one incident apex angle, because four base angles and two apex angles together add to 2π , too
much for the vertex of a convex polyhedron. The well-behaved vertex types allow arbitrarily many
apex angles together with zero or two base angles, and zero or one apex angles with four base angles,
so they include all the vertices that have at most four base angles and obey this constraint.
Lemma 11. In a semipyramidal vertex incident to exactly two apex angles of isosceles triangles,
with al l incident triangles congruent and having apex angle greater than π/2, the dihedral angle
between the two incident apex angles is less than π/2.
Proof. For two isosceles triangles with apex angle θ > π/2 that meet on a shared side and lie on
perpendicular planes, the angle between their other two sides can be calculated as cos−1 (cos2 (π−θ)) >
π − θ . However, two base angles of the same triangle can together span an angle of at most π − θ ,
13
not enough to connect two apex angles with this dihedral. Therefore, in order to form a connected
surface at the vertex, the dihedral must be smaller.
Monohedral isosceles convex polyhedra with more than four base angles at some vertices do
exist. For instance, the Kleetopes of the regular tetrahedron, octahedron, or icosahedron have six,
eight, or ten bases meeting at some vertices respectively. However, there are only ﬁnitely many such
cases:
Theorem 12. There are only a ﬁnite number of triangulations that can be realized as non-wel l-
behaved monohedral isosceles convex polyhedra.
Proof. Let P be such a polyhedron, with n faces. By Observation 10, P must have a vertex v at
which six or more base angles meet. Therefore, the base angle must be less than π/3, from which it
follows that the apex angle must be greater than π/3.
In P , as in any icosahedral polyhedron) the number of base angles of faces is exactly twice the
number of apex angles of faces, and because the large apex angle allows at most ﬁve apex angles to
meet at a vertex, there must be Ω(n) faces with at least half as many apex angles as base angles.
According to Observation 10, such a vertex can only be pyramidal or semi-pyramidal, with at most
ﬁve incident faces. In order to have total angular defect 4π , these faces need to have angular defect
O(1/n). We distinguish the following cases:
• A semipyramidal vertex with one incident apex angle has angular defect exactly π , which can
only be O(1/n) if n is itself bounded.
• If there are Ω(n) semipyramidal vertices with two incident apex angles, then to achieve angular
defect O(1/n) for each of these vertices, the apex angle must be π − 2δ and the base angle
must be δ for some δ = O(1/n).
Because these vertices use equal numbers of apex and base angles, but the faces of the
polyhedron have twice as many base angles as apex angles, there must also be a linear number
of base angles that participate in other vertices with zero or one incident apex angles. If there
are k of these other vertices, then each apex angle contributes less than π to the total angle of
each of these other vertices, and all of the base angles together contribute O(1) to the total
angle, so the total angle is ≤ kπ + O(1), but in order to achieve total angular deﬁcit at most
4π the total angle must be ≥ (2k − 4)π . Combining these two inequalities shows that k = O(1)
and that, therefore, at least one of these other vertices has Ω(n) incident base angles.
At a vertex with Ω(n) incident base angles, each pair of consecutive base angles that meet
along a side of their faces (rather than sharing a base edge) must have a semipyramidal vertex
with two incident apex angles at the other end of that side. When n is large enough that
the apex angle is greater than π/2, by Lemma 11, the dihedral angle between these two
consecutive base angles must be less than π/2. But a vertex of a convex polyhedron can have
at most three dihedral angles less than π/2, so n must be bounded.
• If there are Ω(n) pyramidal vertices with three incident apex angles, then to achieve angular
defect O(1/n) for each of these vertices, the apex angle must be 2π/3 − 2δ and the base angle
must be π/6 + δ for some δ = O(1/n). However, the base angles of the faces must also appear
in a linear number of non-pyramidal vertices, and for these apex and base angles, all other
vertex types have angular deﬁcit at least π/6 − O(δ), bounded away from zero. Therefore, to
keep the total angular defect below 4π , n must be bounded.
14
Figure 8: A polyhedron with 16 faces, part of an inﬁnite family of non-well-behaved non-convex
monohedral isosceles bipyramids in which every vertex has positive angular deﬁcit.
• If there are Ω(n) pyramidal vertices with four incident apex angles, or semipyramidal vertices
with three incident apex angles, then to achieve angular defect O(1/n) for each of these
vertices, the apex angle must be π/2 − 2δ and the base angle must be π/4 + δ for some
δ = O(1/n). Because vertices of these types use fewer than twice as many base angles as apex
angles, the base angles of the faces must also appear in a linear number of vertices of other
types, and for these apex and base angles, all other vertex types have angular deﬁcit at least
π/4 − O(δ), bounded away from zero. Therefore, to keep the total angular defect below 4π , n
must be bounded.
• If there are Ω(n) pyramidal vertices with ﬁve incident apex angles, then to achieve angular
defect O(1/n) for each of these vertices, the apex angle must be 2π/5 − 2δ and the base angle
must be 3π/10 + δ for some δ = O(1/n). Because vertices of these types use fewer than twice
as many base angles as apex angles, the base angles of the faces must also appear in a linear
have angular deﬁcit at least π/5 − O(δ), bounded away from zero. Therefore, to keep the total
number of vertices of other types, and for these apex and base angles, all other vertex types
angular defect below 4π , n must be bounded.
• There can be no pyramidal vertices with six or more incident apex angles, or semipyramidal
vertices with four or more incident apex angles, because the total angle of such a vertex would
be greater than 2π .
No case allows n to be arbitrarily large, so it must be bounded, and the number of triangulations
with n faces must also be bounded.
We remark that this result applies only to convex realizations. There exist non-convex non-well-
behaved monohedral isosceles polyhedra, combinatorially equivalent to bipyramids, with arbitrarily
many faces. It is even possible to realize these polyhedra in such a way that all vertices have positive
angular defect (Figure 8).
Theorem 13. A monohedral isosceles convex polyhedron with n faces must have apex angle O(1/n).
Proof. By Theorem 12 we may assume without loss of generality that the polyhedron is well-behaved,
because the ﬁnitely many non-well-behaved possibilities do not aﬀect the asymptotic statement of
the theorem.
Because the polyhedron has twice as many base angles as apex angles, and (by the assumption
that it is well-behaved) each vertex has O(1) base angles, it follows that there are Ω(n) vertices that
have at least twice as many incident base angles as apex angles. To keep the total angular deﬁcit
15
equal to 4π , Ω(n) of these vertices must have deﬁcit O(1/n). This rules out the semipyramidal
vertices with one incident apex angle, for suﬃciently large n, because they have deﬁcit exactly π .
The only remaining possibilities are the basic and semibasic vertices. If the base angle is θ and the
apex angle is π − 2θ, then a basic vertex has angular deﬁcit 2π − 4θ and a semibasic vertex has
angular deﬁcit π − 2θ. This can only be O(1/n) if θ = π/2 − O(1/n), for which the apex angle is
O(1/n).
5.3 Graph-theoretic properties
The inﬁnite families of monohedral isosceles convex polyhedra listed at the start of this section all
have many basic or semi-basic vertices, but few pyramidal or semipyramidal vertices. This can be
formalized and proven more generally:
Lemma 14. In a wel l-behaved monohedral isosceles convex polyhedron, there is a nonzero but
bounded number of pyramidal or semipyramidal vertices.
Proof. The number of apex angles is half the number of base angles, but the basic and semi-basic
vertices use more than twice as many base angles as apex angles, so the leftover apex angles must
be incident to pyramidal or semipyramidal vertices. If there are k pyramidal or semipyramidal
vertices, then the base angles incident to these vertices contribute total angle less than πk (less than
π for each pair of base angles incident to a semipyramidal vertex) and the apex angles contribute
O(1) (because there are ≤ n of them, each with angle O(1/n). Therefore, the total angle is at most
πk + O(1). However, the total angle must be at least 2πk − 4π in order to achieve total angular
deﬁcit 4π for the whole polyhedron. Combining these inequalities, k must be O(1).
We can use this fact to show that the graphs of monohedral isosceles convex polyhedra have
small dominating sets. Recall that a dominating set, in a graph, is a subset of the vertices such that
every vertex in the graph either belongs to this set or has a neighbor in the set.
Theorem 15. If G is a triangulation that can be realized as a monohedral isosceles convex polyhedron,
then G has a dominating set of size O(1).
Proof. If the realization is not well-behaved, then G has O(1) vertices, and we may take the entire
vertex set as the dominating set. Otherwise, we claim that the pyramidal and semipyramidal vertices
form a dominating set, which by Lemma 14 has size O(1). By the assumption that the realization
is well-behaved, every vertex is pyramidal or semipyramidal (and belongs to this set), or is basic
or semibasic. In a basic or semibasic vertex, there are four incident base angles, and at most one
apex angle to separate them, so some two base angles must be adjacent across a shared side of
their two faces rather than across a shared base edge. The vertex adjacent to the basic or semibasic
vertex at the other end of this shared side has two incident apex angles, so it must be pyramidal or
semipyramidal.
Theorem 16. If G is a triangulation that can be realized as a monohedral isosceles convex polyhedron,
then G has unweighted graph diameter O(1).
Proof. Choose a starting vertex v within the small dominating set for G, and partition the vertices
into subsets Si of the vertices at distance i from v (the layers of G in a breadth-ﬁrst search from v).
Then at most two consecutive layers can be disjoint from the dominating set, because three or more
consecutive layers would leave the vertices in the middle layer without a neighbor in the dominating
set. Therefore, the number of layers is at most three times the size of the dominating set.
16
6 Conclusions and open problems
We have shown that not every triangulated polyhedral graph has a convex isosceles realization, but
that a wide family of polyhedral graphs (including all the ones that we use to prove have no convex
isosceles realizations) do have non-convex isosceles realizations. It would be of interest to ﬁnd
triangulated polyhedral graphs for which even a non-convex but non-self-crossing isosceles realization
is impossible. More ambitiously, we would like to understand the computational complexity of
testing whether a (convex or non-convex) isosceles realization exists, and of ﬁnding one when it
exists, but such a result seems far beyond the methods we have used in this paper.
We have also added to the zoo of known inﬁnite families of polyhedra with congruent isosceles
faces. As well as these inﬁnite families, there also some number of sporadic examples of such
polyhedra, presumably many more than the eight convex deltahedra (convex polyhedra with
congruent equilateral triangle faces). Is it possible to classify all such polyhedra rather than merely
ﬁnding more examples? Can our graph-theoretic analysis assist in this classiﬁcation?
The example of Gr¨unbaum’s polytope (Figure 1, right) shows that there are additional families
of convex polyhedra with edges of two lengths (necessarily, with all faces isosceles or equilateral)
than the families of monohedral isosceles polyhedra already listed. Can these families be classiﬁed?
To what extent can our structural analysis of monohedral isosceles polyhedra be extended to them?
Our triangulations that cannot be realized as isosceles convex polyhedra show that, for convex
realizations, at least three edge lengths may sometimes be needed. Is the minimum number of
edge lengths of convex realizations of polyhedral graphs bounded or unbounded? What about for
non-convex realizations?
Acknowledgements
We thank Joseph Malkevitch for directing our attention to his Consortium paper, and Philip Rideout
for the svg3d Python package with which many of the ﬁgures were made.
References
[1] A. D. Alexandrov. Convex Polyhedra. Springer Monographs in Mathematics. Springer-Verlag,
Berlin, 2005.
[2] David Barnette and Branko Gr¨unbaum. Preassigning the shape of a face. Paciﬁc J. Math.,
32:299–306, 1970. URL: https://projecteuclid.org/euclid.pjm/1102977361.
[3] Marshall Bern, Erik D. Demaine, David Eppstein, Eric Kuo, Andrea Mantler, and Jack Snoeyink.
Ununfoldable polyhedra with convex faces. Computational Geometry: Theory & Applications,
24(2):51–62, 2003. doi:10.1016/S0925-7721(02)00091-3.
[4] Robert J. MacG. Dawson. Some new tilings of the sphere with congruent triangles. In Reza
Sarhangi and Robert V. Moody, editors, Renaissance Banﬀ: Mathematics, Music, Art, Culture,
pages 489–496, Southwestern College, Winﬁeld, Kansas, 2005. Bridges Conference. URL:
https://archive.bridgesmathart.org/2005/bridges2005-489.html.
[5] Erik D. Demaine, Martin L. Demaine, and David Eppstein. Acutely triangulated, stacked, and
very ununfoldable polyhedra. In Proceedings of the 32nd Canadian Conference on Computational
Geometry (CCCG 2020), 2020.
17
[6] Hans Freudenthal and B. L. van der Waerden. Over een bewering van Euclides. Simon Stevin,
25:115–128, 1947.
[7] Michael Goldberg. Questions, discussions, and notes: New equilateral polyhedra. American
Mathematical Monthly, 43(3):172–174, 1936. doi:10.2307/2300360.
[8] Branko Gr¨unbaum. Unambiguous polyhedral graphs. Israel Journal of Mathematics, 1(4):235–
238, 1963. doi:10.1007/BF02759726.
[9] Branko Gr¨unbaum. A convex polyhedron which is not equifacettable. Geombinatorics, 10:165–
171, 2001.
[10] Joseph Malkevitch. Convex isosceles triangle polyhedra. Geombinatorics, 10:122–132, 2001.
[11] Joseph Malkevitch. Convex isosceles triangle polyhedra. Consortium, 116:28–30, Spring–Summer
2019.
[12] J. W. Moon and L. Moser. Simple paths on polyhedra. Paciﬁc J. Math., 13:629–631, 1963.
URL: https://projecteuclid.org/euclid.pjm/1103035751.
[13] Ernst Steinitz. Polyeder und Raumeinteilungen.
In Encyclop¨adie der mathematischen
Wissenschaften, Band 3 (Geometries), volume IIIAB12, pages 1–139. 1922. URL: https:
//gdz.sub.uni-goettingen.de/dms/load/img/?PPN=PPN360609767{&}DMDID=dmdlog203.
[14] John M. Sullivan. Minkowski sums and spherical duals. In Reza Sarhangi and John Sharp,
editors, Bridges London: Mathematics, Music, Art, Architecture, Culture, pages 117–122,
London, 2006. Tarquin Publications. URL: https://archive.bridgesmathart.org/2006/
bridges2006-117.html.
[15] Charles W. Trigg. An inﬁnite class of deltahedra. Mathematics Magazine, 51(1):55–57, 1978.
doi:10.2307/2689647.
[16] W. T. Tutte. How to draw a graph. Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society (Third
Series), 13:743–767, 1963. doi:10.1112/plms/s3-13.1.743.
18
